..COMM:
Carroll
..LANG:
English
..PUBD:
1904
..LODD:
040428
\~ Date was Replaced
..DTYP:
I
..CTCA:
10-Inferno
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     One of the principal difficulties in writing a life of Dante
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
arises from the phenomenal nature of his mind.  There is no poet of the
first rank whose writings are so full of his own personality: the
history of Florence, of Italy, for that matter of the universe, visible
and invisible, crystallizes round himself and his fortunes.  Our first
thought is that this will make the writing of his life an easy task,
but it is far otherwise.  The very structure of Dante's mind half
reveals and half conceals the facts.  `His nature,' says Lowell, `was
one in which, as in Swedenborg's, a clear practical understanding was
continually streamed over by the northern lights of mysticism' [Essay
on Dante, ^Among my Books~].  No man ever saw facts with clearer eyes,
but also no man ever had a more tantalizing genius for concealing them
under a veil of allegory.  The result is that while his writings are
full to overflowing of the events of his life, it is often impossible
to say with certainty what exactly the events are, -- how much is fact,
how much figure.
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     A further difficulty springs from the difference between his
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
contemporaries' estimate of Dante and our own, a difference which we
are too apt to forget.  It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that to
us his age lives through him and through him alone.  Some obscure
Florentine becomes immortal because Dante names him, a Council meeting
interesting because Dante was present, a battle memorable because Dante
fought at it.  But of all this his contemporaries knew nothing.  No
prophetic instinct warned them that the exile, driven about like a
battered hulk by `the dry winds of poverty,' was one concerning whom
future generations would ransack all Italy to discover one little fact,
and that wherever his feet had wandered would become a place of
pilgrimage.  No one dreamed that it would be worth while to preserve
any record of his deeds or journeyings.  When, a generation or two
later, men began to suspect the greatness of the spirit that had walked
amongst them, it was too late: the facts were irrecoverably gone, like
the Sybil's leaves upon the wind, and little remained but the myths and
legends which gather round every great name.  These, begun by the
inveterate romancer Boccaccio, have been handed down as history from
commentator to commentator, until now it is almost impossible to
disentangle fact from fiction.  `A complete biography of the poet,'
declares Scartazzini, `free from gaps and properly rounded off, cannot
be written in the existing state of scientific research' [^A Companion
to Dante~ (English Translation), p. 30].  On the other hand, however,
it is quite possible to exaggerate the importance of this uncertainty.
The larger outlines of the life are not doubtful; and, after all, the
real life of Dante consists far less in its external events than in the
thoughts and emotions which they roused in his mind and soul.  It is
only the larger outlines which can be here attempted, especially as
these become visible, more or less dimly, through the veil of his own
writings.
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     Dante -- or, to give the full form, Durante -- Alighieri was
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
born in Florence in the year 1265.  The month was May, but the exact
day is uncertain.  In the ^Paradiso~ (xxii. 106-117) he tells us that
he `first felt the Tuscan air' under the sign of Gemini, to which he
owed all his genius, `whatsoever it may be.'  In 1265 it has been
calculated that the sun entered this sign on May 18, and left it on
June 17.  Dante's birthday therefore lies between these two dates; and
the 30th of May has been suggested as being the ^festa~ of Lucia, his
patron saint, who comes to his aid more than once in the ^Commedia~
[^Inf.~ ii. 94-117; ^Purg.~ ix. 49-63.  St. Bernard points out her
place in the Rose of Paradise (^Par.~ xxxii. 136-138.  See also
{comm. to ^Inf.~ 2.124-126}].  Of his ancestors almost nothing is known
beyond what he himself tells us.  In the Heaven of Mars he meets his
crusading forefather, Cacciaguida, and confesses that even in Paradise he
could not restrain a thrill of pride for `our poor nobility of blood.'
This Cacciaguida was his great-great-grandfather, who joined the Emperor,
Conrad III., in the disastrous Second Crusade for which St. Bernard was
responsible, was knighted by him for his noble deeds, and laid down his
life for Holy Land.  He gives Dante an outline of his life:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     `In your ancient Baptistery at once
     Christian and Cacciaguida I became.
     Moronto was my brother and Eliseo;
     My wife came to me from Val di Pado,
     And from her thy surname was derived.
     I followed afterward the Emperor Conrad,
     And he begirt me of his chivalry,
     So much by good work came I into grace.
     After him I went `gainst the iniquity
     Of that law, whose people doth usurp
     Your just possession, through the Pastor's fault.
     There was I at the hands of that foul folk
     Unswathed of the deceitful world,
     The love of which full many a soul befouls,
     And came from martyrdom unto this peace.'
                         [^Par.~ xv. 134-148.]
..TEXT:
Cacciaguida's wife is supposed to have been one of the Alighieri of
Ferrara, and it is interesting to know that it is from her Dante's
surname comes.  [The derivation of Alighieri, or Aldighieri, has
exercised the ingenuity of commentators.  Federn says confidently it is
`a German name, and most probably derived from "Aldiger," which has
about the same significance as the word "Shakespeare," meaning "the
ruler of the spear."'  Others derive it from ^alga~, the sea-weed in
which the swampy valley of the Po abounds.]  From the mention of
Eliseo, Boccaccio asserts that he was descended from the Elisei, an
ancient Roman family, but of this there is no proof.  When Dante asks
for further information of his ancestors, Cacciaguida declines to
give it:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     `Suffice it of my forbears to hear this;
     Who they were, and whence they hither came,
     Silence is more honorable than speech.'
                         [^Par.~ xvi. 43-45.]
..TEXT:
It is impossible to say with any certainty the reason for this strange
reticence.  It may be a confession of Dante's own ignorance; but from
its context it seems rather the silence of humility which befits
Paradise.  From other passages it appears certain that Dante believed
himself to be of the ancient Roman stock [^Inf.~ xv. 73-78, etc.]; but
Cacciaguida refuses to encourage this pride of blood.  It is probably
as a warning against it that he tells him how his own son, Dante's
great-grandfather, Alighiero, has been circling the Terrace of Pride on
Mount Purgatory for more than a hundred years [^Par.~ xv. 91-96].  The
only other member of the house named is one of whom there was no
temptation to be proud -- a certain Geri del Bello, a first cousin of
Dante's father, a quarrelsome man who stirred up strife among the
Sacchetti, and was stabbed for his pains by a member of that family.
In the Bolgia of the Schismatics in the Eighth Circle of Hell, Virgil
saw him pointing threateningly at Dante for having left his death
unavenged [^Inf.~ xxix. 1-36.  See {comm. thereto}].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     Of his parents Dante makes no mention whatever, except in the
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
most indirect way.  His father is said to have been a notary of
Florence.  He was twice married, and Dante was the son of his first
wife, Bella, of whose family nothing whatever seems to be certainly
known.  A single line in the ~Commedia~ is her only memorial [^Inf.~
viii. 45.  Comp. ^Conv.~ i. 13, where, speaking of the benefits he had
received from his native tongue, he says: `this my language (^Volgare~)
was the uniter of my parents, who spoke with it,... and thus was one
of the causes of my being'].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     The great and decisive event of Dante's boyhood, youth, and
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
early manhood -- indeed, of his whole life -- was his love of Beatrice,
narrated in his first work, the ^Vita Nuova~.  The title indicates,
doubtless, the new existence into which this great passion ushered
him.  The story is told with a peculiar ethereal and dreamlike purity
and beauty; and indeed it is largely composed of dreams.  It consists
of a series of poems interpreted by a prose commentary.  Norton has
shown that the book is most symmetrically constructed, and falls into
three divisions of ten poems each.  [See Essay `On the Structure of the
Vita Nuova' in Charles E. Norton's Translation of ^The New Life,~ pp.
129-134.]  The first (sections i.-xvi.) relates the beginning of
his love and its extraordinary effects upon himself.  He saw this
`youngest of the Angels' for the first time when she was at the
beginning, and he at the end, of their ninth year.  In his eighteenth
year he met her in the street, and for the first time received her
salutation.  It threw him into a dream of terror and of joy.  Love, a
lord of terrible aspect outwardly but full of joy within, appeared to
him in a cloud of fire, bearing in his arms `the Lady of the
salutation,' asleep, and covered with a blood-red cloth.  In his hand
he held Dante's own heart which was all on fire, and, awaking the lady,
he forced her to eat it, which she did as one in fear.  `Then, having
waited again a space, all his joy was turned into most bitter weeping;
and as he wept he gathered the lady into his arms, and it seemed to me
that he went with her up towards heaven: whereby such a great anguish
came upon me that my light slumber could not endure through it, but was
suddenly broken' [^V. N.~ iii; the passages quoted are from Rossetti's
translation].  It is obviously his first premonition of the early
death of Beatrice.  The dream made him a poet: he related it in the
first Sonnet of ^The New Life~, which he sent to the famous poets of
the day for their interpretation.  One of the answers came in a Sonnet
from Guido Cavalcanti, whom Dante henceforth called `the first among
his friends' [Rossetti in ^Dante and his Circle~ translates three of
these replies: Guido Cavalcanti's (p. 131), Cino da Pistoia's (p. 183),
and Dante da Maiano's (p. 198).  The last tells Dante to consult a
doctor for such delirium].  To conceal his love he tells us that he
used several ladies as screens, and with such unhappy success that
Beatrice, hearing rumours which `seemed to misfame him of vice,' denied
him her salutation, and even mocked him at a marriage festivity.
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     The second division of the ^Vita Nuova~ extends from section
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
xvii. to section xxx.  The refusal by Beatrice of her salutation which
had hitherto been his highest bliss, made him resolve to fall back upon
another beatitude which could never fail: he begins `new matter' --
^materia nuova~ -- `more noble than the foregoing.'  He has spoken
sufficiently of himself and his condition; he will henceforth speak only
of his lady's praise.  But mingling with this praise come renewed
premonitions of her early death.  A sickness falls upon himself, and
musing on the frail thread of his own life, the thought suddenly came:
`Of necessity it must be that the most gentle Beatrice shall some time
die.'  In the delirium of his sickness he has a vision of her passing
to Paradise.  `And at the first, it seemed to me that I saw certain
faces of women with their hair loosened, which called out to me, "Thou
shalt surely die"; after the which, other terrible and unknown
appearances said unto me, "Thou art dead."  At length, as my phantasy
held on in its wanderings, I came to be I knew not where, and to behold
a throng of dishevelled ladies wonderfully sad, who kept going hither
and thither weeping.  Then the sun went out, so that the stars showed
themselves, and they were of such a colour that I knew they must be
weeping: and it seemed to me that the birds fell dead out of the sky,
and that there were great earthquakes.  With that, while I wandered in
my trance, and was filled with a grievous fear, I conceived that a
certain friend came unto me and said: "Hast thou not heard?  She that
was thine excellent lady hath been taken out of life."  Then I began to
weep very piteously; and not only in mine imagination, but with mine
eyes, which were wet with tears.  And I seemed to look towards Heaven,
and to behold a multitude of angels who were returning upwards, having
before them an exceedingly white cloud: and these angels were singing
together gloriously, and the words of their song were these: "^Osanna
in excelsis~"; and there was no more that I heard.  Then my heart that
was so full of love said unto me: "It is true that our lady lieth
dead"; and it seemed to me that I went to look upon the body wherein
that blessed and most noble spirit had had its abiding-place.  And so
strong was this idle imagining, that it made me to behold my lady in
death; whose head certain ladies seemed to be covering with a white
veil; and who was so humble of her aspect that it was as though she had
said, "I have attained to look on the beginning of peace" [^V. N.~
xxiii].  It was not long till the vision was fulfilled.  A canzone
which he was writing in her praise is suddenly broken off with the
opening words of the ^Lamentations of Jeremiah~: ^Quomodo sedet
sola civitas plena populo! facta est quasi vidua domina gentium!~  `I
was still occupied with this poem (having composed thereof only the
above written stanza), when the Lord God of justice called my most
gracious lady unto Himself, that she might be glorious under the banner
of that blessed Queen Mary, whose name had always a deep reverence in
the words of holy Beatrice' [^V. N.~ xxix].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     The final sections (xxxi.-xliii.) take up a new theme -- ^nuova
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
materia~ -- the various phases of his grief, the greatest grief of all
being a temptation to forget it: `O last regret, regret can die!'  One
day struggling with his sorrow, and looking up in fear lest he was
observed, `I saw,' he says, `a young and very beautiful lady, who was
gazing upon me from a window with a gaze full of pity, so that the very
sum of pity appeared gathered together in her.'  She reminded him of
his own `most noble lady who was wont to be of a like paleness.'  His
eyes began to be gladdened with her company overmuch, and he cursed
them bitterly for their inconstancy.  The struggle was decided by
another vision: `There rose up in me on a certain day, about the ninth
hour, a strong visible phantasy, wherein I seemed to behold the most
gracious Beatrice, habited in that crimson raiment which she had worn
when I had first beheld her; also she appeared to me of the same tender
age as then.  Whereupon I fell into a deep thought of her; and my
memory ran back, according to the order of time, unto all those matters
in the which she had borne a part; and my heart began painfully to
repent of the desire by which it had so basely let itself be possessed
during so many days, contrary to the constancy of reason.  And then,
this evil desire being quite gone from me, all my thoughts turned again
unto their excellent Beatrice.  And I say most truly that from that
hour I thought constantly of her with the whole humbled and ashamed
heart' [^V. N.~ xl].  A final vision determined him to say no more
until he could write of her what had never been written of any woman.
The reference is, without doubt, to the ^Divina Commedia~ [the passage
is quoted {in comm. to ^Inf.~ 2.103-105}].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     It is impossible to enter at any length into the problem of the
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
identity of Beatrice; each reader will decide it according to the
general conception which he forms of Dante and his works.  The idea,
however, that she was a mere spiritual abstraction is quite
inconsistent with Dante's genius.  However much he might allegorize, it
lay in the very nature of his mind to start from some concrete and
literal fact [Federn (^Dante and his Time~ 222 n.) points out that `if
Beatrice were a solemn and allegoric name, Dante never would have used
the tender abbreviation of "Bice," and spoken of her in the same breath
with "Vanna" (Jennie), Guido's love,' as he does in Sonnet XIV. of the
^Vita Nuova~ (section xxiv.) and in Sonnet XXXII.  See also ^Par.~ vii.
14].  Tradition, following Boccaccio and Dante's own son, Pietro, has
identified her with Beatrice, daughter of Folco Portinari, a wealthy
and much esteemed citizen of Florence; and we know that in 1287 this
lady married Simone de' Bardi, and died on June 8, 1290, at the age of
twenty-four.  Whether it was Beatrice Portinari or another, it is plain
that from the first Dante's intensely mystical imagination began to
invest her with strange symbolic meanings and correspondences.  In her,
he says, Homer's words are fulfilled: `She seemed not to be the
daughter of mortal man, but of God.' Her salutation destroyed every
evil passion: `When she appeared in any place, it seemed to me, by the
hope of her excellent salutation, that there was no man mine enemy any
longer; and such warmth of charity came upon me that most certainly in
that moment I would have pardoned whosoever had done me an injury.'
`This excellent lady came at last into such favour with all men, that
when she passed anywhere folk ran to behold her; which thing was a deep
joy to me: and when she drew near unto any, so much truth and
simpleness entered into his heart, that he dared neither to lift his
eyes nor to return her salutation: and unto this many who have felt it
can bear witness.  She went along crowned and clothed with humility,
showing no whit of pride in all that she heard and saw: and when she
had gone by, it was said of many, "This is not a woman, but one of the
beautiful angels of Heaven"; and there were some that said, "This is
surely a miracle; blessed be the Lord, who hath power to work thus
marvellously" [^V. N.~ xi., xxvi.].  Her death completed the process of
spiritual idealization -- she is transformed into `a miracle whose only
root is the Holy Trinity.'  He explains why the number nine is so
friendly to Beatrice: `I say, then, that according to the division of
time in Italy, her most noble spirit departed from among us in the
first hour of the ninth day of the month; and according to the division
of time in Syria, in the ninth month of the year: seeing that Tismim,
which with us is October, is there the first month.  Also she was taken
from among us in that year of our reckoning (to wit, of the years of
our Lord) in which the perfect number was nine times multiplied within
that century wherein she was born into the world: which is to say, the
thirteenth century of Christians.
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     `And touching the reason why this number was so closely allied
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
unto her, it may peradventure be this.  According to Ptolemy, (and also
to the Christian verity,) the revolving heavens are nine; and according
to the common opinion among astrologers, these nine heavens together
have influence over the earth.  Wherefore it would appear that this
number was thus allied unto her for the purpose of signifying that, at
her birth, all these nine heavens were at perfect unity with each other
as to their influence.  This is one reason that may be brought: but
more narrowly considering, and according to the infallible truth, this
number was her own self: that is to say, by similitude.  As thus.  The
number three is the root of the number nine; seeing that without the
interposition of any other number, being multiplied merely by itself,
it produceth nine, as we manifestly perceive that three times three are
nine.  Thus, three being of itself the efficient of nine, and the Great
Efficient of Miracles being of Himself Three Persons (to wit: the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit), which, being Three, are also
One: -- this lady was accompanied by the number nine to the end that
men might clearly perceive her to be a nine, that is, a miracle, whose
only root is the Holy Trinity.  It may be that a more subtle person
would find for this thing a reason of greater subtlety: but such is the
reason that I find, and that liketh me best' [^V. N.~ xxx.  For Tismin,
or Tismim, as Rossetti has it, Moore reads Tisrin, the Syrian month
Tixryn, as given by the Arabian astronomer, Alfraganus (see Toynbee's
^Dante Dictionary~)].  The `more subtle person' is perhaps one of
Dante's commentators.
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     Those writers who regard Beatrice as a mere abstraction, say
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
for Theology or the Church, appeal to the ^Convito~, Dante's second
great work, which undoubtedly has an intimate and mysterious connection
with the ^Vita Nuova~.  When it was written is very uncertain --
probably at various dates during the earlier years of his exile [see,
however, Mis Hillard's discussion of the chronology in the introduction
to her translation of the ^Convito~ (pp.  xvii-xxxiv)].  Dante's
original intention was to take fourteen of his canzoni and write on
each a commentary, thus forming, as one says, a kind of treasury of
universal knowledge in fourteen books.  The plan was never carried
beyond the fourth, Book I, being an introduction to the whole.  It is
called the ^Convito~ or ^Banquet~, because it was Dante's wish to
spread a feast of wisdom, `bread of the angels,' for the multitude, the
unlearned crowd, who else must `feed in common with the sheep.'  It is,
in short, as Wicksteed says, `an attempt to throw into popular form the
matter of the Aristotelian treatises of Albertus Magnus and Thomas
Aquinas,' and is therefore of the first importance for the
interpretation of the ^Commedia~, which cannot be fully understood
without it.  As already said, its relation to the ^Vita Nuova~ is at
once close and mysterious.  We saw that Dante after the death of
Beatrice was tempted to find consolation in the ^donna pietosa~, the
young and beautiful lady who looked at him from a window with eyes of
pity, and that after a severe struggle with himself he turned away from
the thought of her as a base treachery to Beatrice.  Now, had he
written nothing more of this Lady of Pity, we should have had little
doubt of these three things: that she was a real woman; that he
regarded his desire for her as base; and that he abandoned her
society.  But in the ^Convito~ he denies all three: she was not a real
woman, but Philosophy; so far from being evil, Philosophy is Divine;
and instead of abandoning her, he gave himself up delightedly to the
most passionate love of her.  He tells us that what moves him to say
this is `the fear of infamy' -- the infamy of passion and inconstancy.
Many having accused him of having `changed from his first love,' he
judges that his best defence is simply to tell who this lady is who had
so changed him.  `I say and affirm that the lady with whom I was
enamoured, after my first love, was the most beautiful and most
virtuous daughter of the Emperor of the Universe, to whom Pythagoras
gives the name of ^Philosophy.~' `This Lady is Philosophy, who is truly
a lady full of sweetness, adorned with virtue, wonderful in knowledge,
glorious in liberty.'  `God, who comprehends all things, sees nothing
so fair as when he looks upon the place where this Philosophy is.  For
Philosophy is a loving use of Wisdom; which exists above all in God,
because in Him is supreme Wisdom, and supreme Love, and supreme
Power....  Oh, most noble and most excellent heart, that hath communion
with the Bride of the Emperor of Heaven! and not Bride only but most
delectable Sister and Daughter!' [^Conv.~ i. 2; ii. 16; iii. 1, etc.].
How this can be in any sense a description of the Lady of Pity in ^The
New Life~, from whom Dante tore himself away as from a temptress, it is
impossible to say.  It is, however, argued by some writers that if
this ^donna pietosa~ is an abstraction for Philosophy and nothing more,
Beatrice herself is equally an abstraction for Theology and nothing
more; and that the sin which Beatrice on the top of Mount Purgatory
drives home so sternly on Dante's conscience, is simply that of
abandoning Theology for the study of wordly philosophy and science
[^Purg.~ xxx. 55-xxxi. 90; xxxiii. 85-90.  See {comms. to ^Inf.~ 1.13-18;
30}].  Against this, however, is the fact that while Dante in the
^Convito~ freely and explicity allegorizes the pitiful Lady of the
window, there is not a syllable of a similar treatment of Beatrice.  It
is likely to remain one of the many unsolved problems of Dante's life and
character.  Perhaps, as Lowell suggests, this transformation of the
Lady of Pity into Philosophy was an illusion of memory.  `Such
idealizations have a very subtle retrospective action, and the new
condition of thought and feeling is uneasy till it has half
unconsciously brought into harmony whatever is inconsistent with it in
the past....  Dante in his exposition of the ^Canzoni~ must have been
subject to this subtlest and most deceitful of influences.  He would
try to reconcile so far as he conscientiously could his present with
his past.  This he could do by means of the allegorical
interpretation.'  Gardner thinks that on the top of Mount Purgatory he
dropped this delusive allegorical veil of self-justification, and at
last confessed the naked truth [^Dante~ (Temple Primers Series), p.
63].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     The education of Dante is involved in a mystery almost as
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
great.  His writings are a perfect mine of mediaeval learning.  `He
anticipated,' says Hettinger, `the most pregnant developments of
Catholic doctrine, mastered its subtlest distinctions, and treated its
hardest problems with almost faultless accuracy.  Were all the libraries
in the world destroyed, and the Holy Scriptures with them, the whole
Catholic system of doctrine and morals might be almost reconstructed
out of the ^Divina Commedia' [^Dante's Divina Commedia~, p. 234.  Dr.
Hettinger writes from the Roman Catholic standpoint].  How this vast
knowledge was acquired is virtually unknown.  Various conjectures have
been made.  Plumptre supposes that Dante, after the custom of boys of
the Middle Ages, went forth to see the world, wandering from university
to university in search of knowledge.  He constructs a romance of `the
student's ^wanderjahre~,' in which the young Florentine visits the
universities of Bologna, Padua, Paris, and even Oxford.  The chief
grounds for this romance are the many traces of travel scattered
throughout the ^Commedia~, but the obvious answer is that these may
refer to the wanderings of his exile [Plumptre's ^Dante~, I. Life,
xlii.  `From a phrase of Boccaccio in a Latin poem addressed to
Petrarca in which he mentions "Parisios demum extremosque Britannos"
among the places visited by Dante, it has been assumed that Dante came
to England; and Giovanni Serravalle, in a commentary on the ^D.C.~
written at the beginning of Cent. xv., goes the length of stating that
he studied at Oxford....  In the absence of more trustworthy evidence,
the fact of this alleged visit to England must be regarded as extremely
doubtful' (Toynbee's ^Dante Dictionary~)].  The view once almost
universally held that his tutor was Brunetto Latini, secretary to the
Florentine government, is now generally abandoned; although it is
obvious from Dante's warm gratitude that he owed much to Brunetto's
kind and fatherly guidance and encouragement [^Inf.~ xv. 79-87.  See
{comm. thereto}].  A third view has much in its favour, namely, that
Dante was, to all intents and purposes, a self-taught man.  In his youth
he had received a good education, as the ^Vita Nuova~ shows; but up to
his twenty-fifth year he had probably attended no university.  It was
only after the death of Beatrice, partly to prepare himself for writing
some great work in her praise, and partly to conquer his grief, that he
threw himself seriously into the study of science and philosophy.  In
the ^Convito~ he gives the following account of himself at this period:
`After some time, my mind, which was struggling to regain its health,
saw that is was necessary (as neither mine own nor others' consolation
was of any avail) to try the plan which another disconsolate one had
adopted to console himself.  And I set myself to read that book of
Boethius, not known to many, wherewith, a prisoner and banished, he had
comforted himself.  And again, hearing that Tullius had written another
book, in which, treating of ^Friendship~, he had spoken consoling words
to Laelius, a most excellent man, on the death of his friend Scipio, I
set myself to read that.  And although at first it was hard for me to
understand their meaning, I finally made out as much as what art of
grammar I possessed, together with some little intellectual power of my
own, enabled me to do; by the which intellectual power I had already
beheld many things, as it were dreaming, as may be seen in the ^Vita
Nuova~.  And just as if a man should go about looking for silver, and
apart from his purpose should find gold (which some occult cause
presented, perhaps not without Divine ordinance); so I, who sought to
console myself, found not only a remedy for my tears, but sayings of
authors, and of sciences, and of books; considering which, I soon
decided that Philosophy, who was the sovereign lady of these authors,
these sciences, and these books, was the supreme thing.  And I imagined
her as a noble lady; and I could not imagine her as other than
merciful; wherefore so willingly did my sense of Truth behold her that
I could scarcely be diverted from her.  And on account of this
imagination I began to go where she in truth showed herself, that is,
in the schools of the religious and the disputations of the
philosophers; so that, in a little while, perhaps thirty months, I
began to be so deeply aware of her sweetness, that the love of her
banished and destroyed every other thought' [^Conv.~ ii. 13.  The two
books named are Boethius' ^De Consolatione Pholosophiae~ and Cicero's
^De Amicitia.~  For connection of the passage with the Savage Wood, see
{comm. to ^Inf.~ 1.2-3}].  In addition to this, his contemporary and
neighbour in Florence, Giovanni Villani, says that after his banishment,
`he went to study at Bologna, and afterwards at Paris, and in many parts
of the world' [^Chronicle~, Bk. ix. ch. 136.]; but doubtless Scartazzini
is not far wrong in supposing that the necessity of earning his bread
made him frequent the universities no less as teacher than as student [^A
Companion to Dante~, Part ii. ch. ii. -- ^Student or Teacher?~].
However he gained his vast learning, he speaks of it with great
humility: `I who do not sit at the blessed table (^i.e.~ where Wisdom,
`the bread of the angels,' is dispensed), but fled from the pasture of
the herd, and at the feet of them who are seated there, gather up what
they let fall' [^Conv.~ i. 1.  Dante evidently regards himself as a
^dilettante~, a mere `picker-up of learning's crumbs'].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     The death of Beatrice was obviously a critical turning-point
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
in Dante's moral life.  There are passages in the ^Commedia~ to which
it seems almost impossible to give any real meaning, except on the
supposition that they refer to certain moral lapses of this period.  It
may have been on this account that his friends, if Boccaccio is to be
believed, arranged his marriage with Gemma Donati, some time between
1291 and 1296.  Of this lady little is known beyond that she was a
distant kinswoman of the haughty and ambitious Corso Donati, to whom
Dante owed his banishment [Dante speaks affectionately of Corso's
brother Forese (^Purg.~ xxiii., xxiv.), and of his sister Piccarda
(^Purg.~ xxiv. 10; ^Par.~ iii).  Corso's death is foretold by Forese
in ^Purg.~ xxiv. 82-87]; that she bore Dante at least four children,
two sons, Pietro and Jacopo, and two daughters, Antonia and Beatrice;
and that she did not join her husband in his exile.  From this last
fact Boccaccio has given currency to the impression which has prevailed
ever since, that the marriage was an unhappy one, and that Gemma was a
veritable Xanthippe.  After expatiating at great length on the
discomforts marriage ^might~ have caused the poet, he winds up: `I
certainly do not say that all this happened in Dante's case, because I
do not know it; but, whether that be the truth or not, Dante when once
parted from his wife -- who, it will be remembered, had been supplied
to him as a consolation in trouble -- would never come where she was,
nor allow her to come to him.'  It is probable, of course, that Gemma,
in common with the rest of the world, was unable to understand and
appreciate her husband's genius, but there is no definite ground for
the hostile view generally taken to her.  [It is surely unnecessary to
suppose that when Forese Donati denounces the women of Florence for
shamelessnes (^Purg.~ xxiii. 94-111), Dante meant to include his own
wife in the general condemnation.]  It is true, Dante never mentions
her in his writings, not did she join in his exile.  The homeless man
had enough to do to maintain himself, and it was mere prudence for his
wife to remain behind in Florence and provide for herself and their
children out of the revenues of her dowry -- meagrely enough, as
Boccaccio admits, for she had to betake herself to `unaccustomed
toil.'  In this struggle surely she had the sympathy and approval of
her husband; and if she had not, we may well spare from the
transfigured and glorified Beatrice one pitying thought for the lonely
wife, `unwept, unhonoured, and unsung.'
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     Dreamer, poet, and student as he was, Dante nevertheless took
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
the keenest interest in the public affairs of his time and city.  At
the age of twenty-four, he had already borne arms for his country.  He
belonged to a Guelph family; and one of his early biographers, Lionardo
Bruni, says that he was present, fighting vigorousely in the very front
rank, at the battle of Campaldino in 1289, when the Florentine Guelphs
inflicted a crushing defeat on the Ghibellines of Arezzo.  He quotes
from a letter now lost in which Dante speaks of `the battle of
Campaldino in which the Ghibelline party was almost destroyed and
undone; where I found myself,' he says, `no child in arms, and where I
had much fear, and in the end very great joy through the varying
chances of that battle.'  In the ^Inferno~ (xxi. 93-96) he tells us he
was present at the taking of the castle of Caprona near Pisa in the
same year, and saw the terror of the garrison as they marched out, lest
the besiegers should break the terms of surrender and slay them on the
spot.
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     In 1295 or 1296 Dante enrolled himself as ^poeta Fiorentino~ in
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
the Guild of Physicians and Apothecaries, this being the necessary
preliminary to his taking any part in the government of the city.  In
1300 he went as ambassador to San Gemignano near Siena, to invite its
citizens to send representatives to an assembly about to be held for
the purpose of electing a new Captain of the Guelph League of Tuscany.
In the same year he was elected one of the six Priors of Florence, his
term of office running from June 15 to August 15.  In the letter
already quoted by Bruni, Dante traces his subsequent misfortunes to
this election: `All my ills and all my troubles had their beginning and
origin from my unlucky election as Prior.  Though in respect of mature
wisdom I was not worthy of this office, yet in loyalty I was not
unworthy of it, nor in age, for ten years had elapsed since the battle
of Campaldino.'
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     At this point it becomes necessary to say a word about those
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
faction-names which are of such constant recurrence in the wild and
tangled politics of mediaeval Italy, -- Guelphs and Ghibellines.  The
words came from Germany: Guelph from ^Welf~, the name of the powerful
family of the Counts of Altdorf; and Ghibelline from ^Weiblingen~, a
castle in Franconia belonging to the great Swabian house of the
Hohenstaufen.  At the battle of Weinsberg in 1140 between these rival
houses, `the names Welf and Weiblingen were for the first time adopted
as war-cries, which were subsequently naturalized in Italy as ^Guelfo~
and ^Ghibellino~, and became the distinctive appellations of the
opposing factions of the Pope and the Emperor.'  It is, however, much
too simple a view to say that the Guelphs were Papalists and the
Ghibellines Imperialists.  In course of time the original principles
were swept into the background, `the spirit of faction outlived the
cause of faction,' and the imperial and papal titles became mere labels
covering every kind of feud and discord -- national and local, class,
family, and individual.  Each side cared for the cause of Pope or
Emperor just so far as Pope or Emperor enabled them to gain their own
ends and drive their rivals into exile.  As Dean Church says: `The
names of Guelf and Ghibelline were the inheritance of a contest which,
in its original meaning, had been long over.  The old struggle between
the priesthood and the empire was still kept up traditionally, but its
ideas and interests were changed: they were still great and important
ones, but not those of Gregory VII.  It had passed over from the mixed
region of the spiritual and temporal into the purely political.  The
cause of the popes was that of the independence of Italy -- the freedom
and alliance of the great cities of the north, and the dependence of
the centre and south on the Roman See.  To keep the Emperor out of
Italy -- to create a barrier of powerful cities against him south of
the Alps -- to form behind themselves a compact territory, rich,
removed from the first burst of invasion, and maintaining a strong body
of interested feudatories, had now become the great object of the
popes....  The two parties did not care to keep in view principles which
their chiefs had lost sight of.  The Emperor and the Pope were both
real powers, able to protect and assist; and they divided between them
those who required protection and assistance.  Geographical position,
the rivalry of neighbourhood, family tradition, private feuds, and
above all private interests, were the main causes which assigned
cities, families, and individuals to the Ghibelline or Guelf party.
One party called themselves the Emperor's liegemen, and their
watch-word was authority and law; the other side were the liegemen of
Holy Church, and their cry was liberty; and the distinction as a broad
one is true.  But a democracy would become Ghibelline, without scruple,
if its neighbour town was Guelf; and among the Guelf liegemen of the
Church and liberty the pride of blood and love of power were not a whit
inferior to that of their opponents....  The Ghibellines as a body
reflected the worldliness, the licence, the irreligion, the reckless
selfishness, the daring insolence, and at the same time the gaiety and
pomp, the princely magnificence and generosity and largeness of mind of
the house of Swabia; they were the men of the court and camp, imperious
and haughty from ancient lineage or the Imperial cause, yet not wanting
in the frankness and courtesy of nobility; careless of public opinion
and public rights, but not dead to the grandeur of public objects and
public services.  Among them were found, or to them inclined, all who,
whether from a base or a lofty ambition, desired to place their will
above law -- the lord of the feudal castle, the robber-knight of the
Apennine pass, the magnificent but terrible tyrants of the cities, the
pride and shame of Italy, the Visconti and Scaligers....  The Guelfs, on
the other hand, were the party of the middle classes; they rose out of
and held to the people; they were strong by their compactness, their
organisation in cities, their commercial relations and interests, their
command of money.  Further, they were professedly the party of
strictness and religion, a profession which fettered them as little as
their opponents were fettered by the respect they claimed for imperial
law.  But though by personal unscrupulouss and selfishness, and in
instances of public vengeance, they sinned as deeply as the Ghibellines,
they stood far more committed as a party to a public meaning and
purposes -- to improvement in law and the condition of the poor, to a
protest against the insolence of the strong, to the encouragement of
industry.  The genuine Guelf spirit was austere, frugal, independent,
earnest, religious, fond of its home and Church, and of those
celebrations which bound together Church and home; but withal very
proud, very intolerant; in its higher form intolerant of evil, but
intolerant always to whatever displeased it' [^Dante: An Essay~, pp.
14-18.  For the connection of Guelphs and Ghibellines with the
`struggle for the supremacy of the mercantile democracy and the Roman
Law over the military aristocracy with its "barbarian" traditions,' see
Wicksteed's Introduction to Selections from Villani's ^Chronicle~, and
Prof. Villari's ^The Two First Centuries of Florentine History~].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     According to Villani, these factions were introduced into
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
Florence in 1215 through the murder of Buondelmonte de' Buondelmonti;
but, of course, this was only the occasion, not the cause [^Chronicle~,
v. 38  See {comm. to ^Inf.~ 28.103-111}].  The city became a battlefield.
The great families built towers to fight their enemies.  `In these
fortresses of the leading families, scattered about the city, were the
various points of onset and recovery in civic battle; in the streets
barricades were raised, mangonels and crossbows were plied from the
towers, a series of separate combats raged through the city, till
chance at length connected the attacks of one side, or some panic
paralysed the resistance of the other, or a conflagration interposed
itself between the combatants, burning out at once Guelf and
Ghibelline, and laying half Florence in ashes.  Each party had their
turn of victory; each, when vanquished, went into exile, and carried on
the war outside the walls; each had their opportunity of remodelling
the orders and framework of government, and each did so relentlessly at
the cost of their opponents.  They excluded classes, they proscribed
families, they confiscated property, they sacked and burned warehouses,
they levelled the palaces, and outraged the pride of their antagonists'
[Church's ^Dante~, pp. 20-21].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     To increase if possible the horror of this suicidal struggle, a
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
new faction was added in the very year when Dante was elected Prior.
In the neighbouring city of Pistoja, a feud had broken out in the
Guelph family of the Cancellieri, the two sides being distinguished as
Bianchi and Neri, Whites and Blacks.  The leaders were arrested and
brought to Florence, with the unhappy issue that it also was set ablaze
with the same feud.  Corso Donati became the head of the Black Guelphs,
his rival, Vieri de' Cerchi, of the White.  They came to blows in the
Piazza di Santa Trinit@a on May-day 1300, and the strife grew to such a
head that Dante and his fellow-Priors found it necessary to banish the
leaders of both sides.  The Blacks appealed to Pope Boniface VIII., who
summoned Charles of Valois, brother of Philip the Fair of France, and
sent him as `peacemaker' to Florence.  Dante and the other White
Guelphs were violently opposed to his entrance.  Dino Compagni (ii. 25)
says that Dante was among the ambassadors whom the Whites sent to Rome
to protest against it; and Boccaccio tells the well-known story that
when his name was proposed Dante exclaimed, `If I go, who remains?
and if I remain, who goes?' -- a question which made him many enemies.
Dante's embassy to Rome is generally regarded as very doubtful, but so
high an authority as Prof. Villari sees no cause to question it [^The
Two First Centuries of Florentine History~, Chap. ix. {Paragraph} vii.
n.].  The only reply the Pope deigned to give to the embassy was the
haughty demand, `Make humiliation to us.'  On November 1, 1301, Charles
of Valois entered Florence with his men unarmed; and on the 5th,
Villani, who was present on the occasion, tells us that he received the
lordship of the city in the church of Santa Maria Novella, swearing, on
his word `as the King's son,' to `preserve the city in peaceful and
good state.'  `And straightway,' adds Villani, `the contrary was done
by him and by his followers.'  He armed his horsemen, and the city saw
that it had been betrayed.  Corso Donati and the Neri were admitted,
threw open the prisons, and drove the Priors from their Palace.  `And',
writes Villani, `during all this destruction of the city M. Charles of
Valois and his people gave no counsel nor help, nor did he keep the
oath and promise made by him.  Wherefore the tyrants and malefactors
and banished men who were in the city took courage, and the city being
unguarded and without government, they began to rob the shops and
places of merchandise and the houses which pertained to the White
party, or to any one that had not the power to resist, slaying and
wounding many persons, good men of the White party.  And this plague
endured in the city for five days continually, to the great ruin of the
city.  And afterwards it continued in the country, the troopers going
on robbing and burning houses for more than eight days, whereby a great
number of beautiful and rich possessions were destroyed and burned.
And when the said destruction and burning was ended, M. Charles and his
council reconstituted the city, and elected a government of Priors of
the popolani of the Black party.  [For an account of the origin of the
Black and White factions, their introduction to Florence, and the
disastrous consequences to the city, see Villani's ^Chronicle~, viii.
38-49.]  It was in this wild storm that Dante's fortunes went down to
rise no more.  The Neri immediately took their revenge.  Dante, who had
been among the most resolute of the opponents of Charles and the Pope,
was naturally one of the victims.  On January 27, 1302, a decree of
banishment was issued against him and four others.  They are accused of
`barratry,' that is, corruption and malversation of public funds,
opposition to the Pope and the entrance of Charles, and to the peace of
Florence and the Guelph party.  Their failure to appear when summoned
by a herald is taken as an acknowledgement of guilt.  They are
sentenced to pay a fine of five thousand gold florins each for contempt
of court, and to restore the money they had taken by fraud within three
days on pain of confiscation of their property; to suffer banishment
from Tuscany for two years; and to have their names inscribed in the
Statutes of the People as forgers and barrators who are excluded for
ever from holding any public office under the Commune of Florence.  On
the 10th of March following, a further sentence condemned the five,
along with ten others, to perpetual banishment, and, if caught on
Florentine soil, to death by burning.
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     `From this time,' says Lowell, `the life of Dante becomes
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
semi-mythical, and for nearly every date we are reduced to the "as they
say" of Herodotus....  During the nineteen years of his exile, it would
be hard to say where he was not.  In certain districts of Northern
Italy there is scarce a village that has not its tradition of him, its
^sedia~, ^rocca~, ^spelonca~, or ^torre di Dante~; and what between the
patriotic complaisance of some biographers overwilling to gratify as
many provincial vanities as possible, and the pettishness of others
anxious only to snub them, the confusion becomes hopeless.'  In a
pathetic passage in the ^Convito~ the homeless exile reveals the
destitute and far-wandering life he was doomed to lead: `Since it
pleased the citizens of the fairest and most famous daughter of Rome,
Florence, to cast me forth from her most sweet bosom (wherein I was
born and nourished up to the climax of my life, and wherein by their
good leave, I long with all my heart to rest my weary soul, and to end
the days allotted to me), through almost every part where her language
is spoken I have wandered, a pilgrim, almost a beggar, displaying
against my will the wounds of fortune, which are often wont to be
imputed unjustly to the wounded one himself.  Truly have I been a
vessel without sail or rudder, borne to divers ports and straits and
shores by the dry wind which blows from dolorous poverty; and have
appeared vile in the eyes of many who, perhaps, through some fame of
me, had imagined me in other guise; in whose consideration not only did
I in person suffer abasement, but all my work became of less account,
that already done as well as that yet to do' [^Conv.~ i. 3].  Thus
amply was his forefather Cacciaguida's well-known prophecy fulfilled:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     Thou shalt abandon everything beloved
     Most tenderly, and this the arrow is
     Which first the bow of exile shooteth forth.
     Thou shalt have proof how savoureth of salt
     The bread of others, and how hard a road
     The going down and up another's stairs.'
                         [^Par.~ xvii. 55-60.]
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     It would be vain to attempt to trace his wanderings in detail.  He
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
is said to have received the news of his exile in Siena on his way
back from Rome.  With other White Guelphs he joined the banished
Ghibellines, and made common cause with them in their efforts to effect
their return to Florence.  Several attempts to force their way into the
city failed, but what part Dante took in these is uncertain.  It was
not long till he severed his connection with both Guelphs and
Ghibellines, and formed a party by himself.  Speaking from the
standpoint of 1300, his ancestor foretells this political detachment
and isolation:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     `And that which most shall weigh upon thy shoulders
     Will be the company malign and stupid
     With which thou shalt fall down into this valley,
     For all ungrateful, all mad and impious,
     Will they become against thee; but soon after
     They and not thou shall have the forehead red.
     Of their bestiality their own procedure
     Shall make the proof, so `twill be well for thee
     To have made thee a party by thyself.'
                              [^Par.~ xvii. 61-69.
..TEXT:
Doubtless his fellow-exiles on their side felt the proud,
impracticable, and visionary nature of the man, and were probably not
unwilling to be rid of him; while Dante must quickly have discovered
that their Ghibellinism was not his.  The truth is, it is misleading
to call Dante a Ghibelline at all, at least in the ordinary meaning of
the name.  He did, indeed, abandon the Guelph party, in which he was
born and bred; but he found that the Ghibellines with whom he acted for
a time regarded the Empire as a mere means and instrument for securing
their supremacy as a faction, while he was dreaming of it as an ideal
kingdom of universal justice in which the very spirit of faction must
die.  [In ^Par.~ vi. 100-102 the Emperor Justinian denounces the Guelphs
for opposing the Eagle, the public standard, and is equally indignant
with the Ghibellines for making it the standard of a faction.]  `He
became a theoretical politician, an ardent and impassioned doctrinaire,
an inspired prophet, standing outside existing factions and clinging
tenaciously to the dream which he had formed of a future and better
state of things, destined by the Providence of God to supersede
factions and restore the divine order of the world' [J. Addington
Symonds' ^The Study of Dante~, p. 63].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     Dante's first refuge was with `the great Lombard,' who is
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
identified with Bartolommeo della Scala of Verona, who died in 1304.
There he saw Can Grande, a boy of nine, to whom afterwards he dedicated
the ^Paradiso [^Par.~ xvii. 70-93; see {comm. to ^Inf.~ 1.100-111}].  His
next resting-place was probably Bologna, where he cannot have remained
longer than 1306, in which year all Florentine exiles and Ghibellines
were expelled from the city.  There is said to exist documentary evidence
that in August of this year he was in Padua, and in October in Lunigiana
as the guest of one of the Malaspina family [^Purg.~ viii. 118-139].  For
four or five years after this, Dante disappears entirely: the Casentino,
Forl@i, Lunigiana again are suggested, but it is pure guesswork.  It is
in this period that the visit to Paris referred to by Villani is
generally supposed to have taken place; and if so, it would account for
the absence of every trace of him in Italy.  He was recalled by the
advent in Italy of the Emperor Henry VII, in September 1310.
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     In his Latin treatise, ^De Monarchia~, Dante discusses the
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
standing problem of the relations of Church and Empire.  The date of it
is unknown, and in the absence of definite information we may regard it
as written in view of Henry's advent.  It is, as one says, `perhaps the
most purely ideal of political works ever written.'  Dante took the
Church and the Empire for granted as the necessary framework of
society, without which, indeed, he could not conceive its existence;
and the ^De Monarchia~ is an attempt to lay down the limits of their
respective jurisdictions.  `It is not the work of a statesman, but of a
philosophical thinker, steeped in the abstractions of the school, and
not constructing his system from given conditions, but basing it on
dogmatic hypotheses, and explaining it from general conceptions.  Dante
does not treat of the State but of the ideal of the universal
republic.  With scholastic method he develops three principles: that
the universal monarchy -- that is to say, the empire -- is necessary to
the wellbeing of human society; that the monarchial power -- the one
indivisible imperium -- legally belongs to the Roman people, and
through them to the emperor; lastly, that the authority of the emperor
is derived immediately from God, and not, according to the opinion of
the priests, from the pope, the Vicar of Christ or God' [Gregorovius,
^Rome in the Middle Ages~, vi. 20 (English Translation)].  It follows
that Church and Empire have distinct and separate functions and
jurisdictions: `Therefore man had need of two guides for his life, as
he had a twofold end in life; whereof one is the Supreme Pontiff, to
lead mankind to eternal life, according to the things revealed to us;
and the other is the emperor, to guide mankind to happiness in this
world, in accordance with the teaching of philosophy' [^De Monarchia~,
iii. 16; see {comm. to ^Inf.~ 1.2-3}].  In `the white star' of Jupiter,
the Heaven of righteous Rulers, Dante works out this conception of
universal monarchy on a wider scale than is possible on `this little
plot of earth.'  The just kings of every age and land in the form of
starry lights spell out, letter by letter, the opening words of the
Book of Wisdom: ^Diligite justitiam qui judicatis terram~, each adding
his contribution to the celestial empire of universal righteousness.
Then on the final M, the initial of Monarchia, more than a thousand
settle and form themselves into the head and neck of the glowing
imperial eagle [^Par.~ xviii. 70-114].  It is the apotheosis of the
Empire of which he had dreamed on earth.  To an idealist like this,
Henry VII. of Luxemburg may well have seemed the heaven-ordained
fulfiller of the dream.  For he too was an idealist, the best knight in
Europe, a lover of righteousness and peace, his imagination touched to
chivalry by the ancient glories of the Empire, and dreaming that, once
crowned at Rome, the factions and wars of Italy would vanish as by
enchantment in universal love and brotherhood.  In the same generous
delusion Dante welcomed him with a passion of religious joy which to
our ears sounds, to say the least, irreverent.  In his Letter to Henry,
`by divine providence King of the Romans, always august,' he says: `In
truth, I, who write as much for myself as for others, saw you most
gracious, as beseems imperial majesty, and heard you most clement, when
my hands touched your feet and my lips paid their debt.  Then my spirit
gloried in you, and silently I said within myself: "Behold the Lamb of
God which taketh away the sin of the world!"' [^Letter~ vii. 2.  The
references to the Letters are according to the Oxford edition of
Dante's Works by Dr. Moore, and the translations are generally those of
Mr. Latham -- ^Dante's Eleven Letters.~  From this quotation it appears
that Dante was present and rendered homage when Henry was crowned with
the iron crown at Milan in 1311].  In another Letter he summons all
Italy to receive the new emperor as the lord and owner of the world: `I
exhort you not only to rise up to meet him, but also to do reverence to
his presence.  Ye who drink of his streams and navigate his seas; ye
who tread the sands of the shores and the summits of the Alps that are
his; ye who rejoice in any public thing whatsoever, and possess private
goods not otherwise than by the bonds of his law; do not, as if
ignorant, deceive yourselves as though ye dreamt in your hearts and
said: "We have no lord."  For his garden and lake is whatever the
heavens encompass round about, since "The sea is God's and he made it,
and His hands formed the dry land"' [^Letter~ v. 7].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     The response of Florence to this summons was the repair and
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
heightening of her walls in defiance of the Emperor; whereupon Dante
wrote a violent letter to `the most infamous Florentines within the
walls,' warning them that all their defences will be powerless to save
them from the imperial vengeance: `In what will it profit you to have
surrounded yourselves with ramparts and battlements, when the eagle,
terrible in a field of gold, swoops down on you, -- the eagle who, now
sailing over the Pyrenees, now over the Caucasus, now over Atlas, the
more strengthened by the opposition of the host of heaven, of old
looked down upon the vast seas as no hindrance to his flight?'
[^Letter~ vi. 3].  To the Emperor himself he did not hesitate to
address a letter of indignant remonstrance for wasting time at the
siege of Cremona when he should be reducing Florence, lopping branches
when he should be killing the root: `Do you not know, perchance, O most
excellent of princes! (nor can you see from the height of such majesty)
where this stinking fox lies safe from the hunters?  Forsooth the
caitiff drinks neither in the waters of the precipitous Po, nor in
those of your Tiber, but the streams of the Arno his jaws thus poison,
and Florence (do you perchance know it not?) is this dire evil
called.  This is the viper that darts at the bowels of its mother; this
is the sick sheep that contaminates the flock of its master by
contact....  Up then, thou noble child of Jesse, take unto thyself
courage from the eyes of the Lord God of Sabaoth, in whose presence
thou art to act; and overthrow this Goliath with the sling of thy
wisdom and the stone of thy strength, for at his fall night and the
shadow of fear will cover the camp of the Philistines, the Philistines
will flee, and Israel will be set at liberty.  Then our heritage,
deprived of which we weep without ceasing, will be restored to us in
its entirety.  And as now, while exiles in Babylon, we lament in
remembering holy Jerusalem, so then, as citizens, and breathing in
peace, with gladness shall we call to mind the miseries of turmoil'
[^Letter~ vii. 7, 8].  But it was not to be: in little more than two
years Henry lay dead at Buonconvento, and Dante's political hopes were
buried in his tomb.  Even had he lived, success was impossible; as
Prof. Villari points out, the national idea and spirit were heaving in
men's minds, and it was precisely the Emperor's claim to be lord of all
men and things which roused this national instinct to opposition [^The
Two First Centuries of Florentine History~, chap. x. {Paragraph}
ix].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     How Dante took the wreck of his hopes we have no means of
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
knowing.  He broke into no cry of lamentation or despair.  In the
^Paradiso~, Beatrice points out to him in the snow-white Rose of the
redeemed `the great seat' of `the lofty Henry who came to straighten
Italy ere she was ready for it'; that is the only reference to the
fading of his hopes [^Par.~ xxx. 133-144.  In 1300, the ideal date of
the poem, the seat, of course, was vacant, but Henry's crown is set
above it in anticipation of his advent.  In reality the passage was
written after his death].  Florence could not forgive the violence of
his denunciations and threats; in a decree of September 2, 1311, he is
one of a number of exiles excluded from amnesty, and never to be
allowed to return to the city.  After Henry's death in 1313, Dante
disappears almost entirely from public view.  In the ^Purgatorio~ he
himself speaks of a visit to Lucca, and it is supposed that this took
place in 1314, when that city was in the hands of the Ghibelline leader
Uguccione della Faggiuola [^Purg.~ xxiv. 34-48].  In November of the
following year another sentence was launched against him, his sons for
some reason being included in it.  Their doom as Ghibellines and rebels
is, if captured, `to be taken to the place of justice, and there to
have their heads struck from their shoulders, so that they die
outright.'  In 1316 an amnesty was offered to the exiles.  Dante,
indeed, was excluded; but private information seems to have been
conveyed to him by friends in the city that the pardon might be
extended to him if he would submit to the conditions -- the payment of
a fine and the performance of a public penance in the Baptistery of St.
John.  In the well-known ^Letter to a Florentine Friend~, Dante
indignantly refused to return on such unjust and shameful terms: `Is
this then the glorious recall wherewith Dante Alighieri is summoned
back to his country after an exile patiently endured for almost fifteen
years?  Did his innocence, manifest to whomsoever it may be, deserve
this -- this, the sweat and increasing toil of study?  Far be the rash
humility of a heart of earth from a man familiar with philosophy that
like a prisoner he may suffer himself to be offered up after the manner
of a certain Ciolo and other criminals.  Far be it from a man who
preaches justice after having patiently endured injury to pay his money
to those inflicting it, as though they were his benefactors.  This is
not the way to return to my country, O my Father.  If another shall be
found by you, or by others, that does not derogate from the fame and
honour of Dante, that will I take with no lagging steps.  But if
Florence is entered by no such path, then never will I enter Florence.
What!  Can I not look upon the face of the sun and the stars
everywhere?  Can I not meditate anywhere under the heavens upon most
sweet truths, unless I first render myself inglorious, nay ignominious,
to the people and state of Florence?  Nor indeed will bread be lacking'
[^Letter~ ix. 3, 4.  The Ciolo is supposed to be a member of the Abati
family -- the only one of his house whose name was expressly excepted
from the decree against the exiles, dated September 2, 1311, referred
to above].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     After a short visit which he is believed to have paid to the
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
Court of Can Grande of Verona, perhaps in 1316, Dante betook himself to
his last earthly refuge.  Guido Novello da Polenta, lord of Ravenna,
and nephew of Francesca da Rimini, invited him to become his guest; and
there among the ruins and mosaics of the old imperial city, and near
`the pine wood on the shore of Chiassi' [^Purg.~ xxviii. 20], he
spent his closing years -- probably, one is glad to think, in more
comfort than he had known during the greater part of his long exile.
His host honoured him for his genius.  His sons Pietro and Jacopo and
his daughter Beatrice were with him, the last a nun in the convent of
Santo Stefano dell'Uliva.  A number of puplis gathered round him, so
that `he was making an independent living in the capacity of professor
or reader of Vernacular Rhetoric at the Studio, or, as we should now
say, University of Ravenna' [Wicksteed and Gardner's ^Dante and
Giovanni del Virgilio -- Prolegomena~, p. 84.  It is suggested that the
^De Vulgari Eloquentia~ was `a kind of poetical text-book for the use
of Dante's students at Ravenna, perhaps actually the substance of his
course of lectures at the University' (p. 86).  Scartazzini makes the
same suggestion, and thinks the ^Convito~ was similarly used as a
text-book].  The Exchange of playful Eclogues between him and Giovanni
del Virgilio, a professor of Bologna, under the pastoral names of
Tityrus and Mopsus, shows that his misfortunes had not entirely crushed
Dante's spirits: he was able still to see the sun.  From references in
the eclogues it is inferred that the ^Inferno~ and ^Purgatorio~ were
already finished, and that Dante was still engaged on the ^Paradiso.~
In 1321, Guido da Polenta sent him on an embassy to Venice in
connection with a dispute which had arisen between the two cities; and
while returning through the marshes he caught fever and died on
September 14, in the fifty-sixth year of his age.  So passed into the
other world the spirit that had so long been a pilgrim in it even upon
earth; and doubtless then were fulfilled to the weary exile the words
he himself had written, probably when his hope of ever entering the
earthly city had grown dim: `And as to him who comes from a long
journey, before he enters into the gate of his city, the citizens
thereof go forth to meet him, so to meet the noble soul go forth those
citizens of the Eternal Life.  And this they do because of her good
works and contemplations' [^Conv.~ iv. 28].  It is the welcome
Beatrice had already given him as he stood on the threshold of
Paradise:
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     `And thou shalt be with me for evermore
     A citizen of that Rome where Christ is Roman.'
                         [^Purg.~ xxxii. 101-102.]
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     Such was the life of Dante Alighieri, a man broken with every
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
variety of sorrow, disappointment, and wordly failure, but never losing
the lordship and freedom of his own soul.  `He had suffered,' says Karl
Federn, `all ill chance that could fall to the lot of man.  He loved
and had lost his beloved one; his family life was unhappy; he was a
statesman, and as such was unsuccessful; he saw his party defeated and
driven from the land, and when the Emperor, from whom he had expected
the redemption of Italy and his own reinstatement, entered Italy with a
victorious army, he saw him die.  He had been full of the noblest
intentions, yet men not only gave him no thanks, but had hunted him
out, had branded his name with foul crimes and condemned him to death.
He had lost his whole fortune; one of the proudest of men, he was
forced continually to humble himself and to live on foreign alms; one
of the greatest poets of all times, he saw himself neither understood
nor honoured.  His whole life was devoted to his native city, he clung
to it with all his heart, and he passed twenty-two years longing in
vain to return to it.  A devout Catholic, full of reverence for his
Church, he saw it degraded, governed by "New Pharisees," and at last
fallen and dishonoured.  Italy, whose unity was dear to him, he saw
torn by the hatred of parties and cruelly devastated by war.  A sea of
wrong had passed over him, he saw a sea of wrong raging over the world
in which he lived; wherever he turned his eyes everything was such as
to drive him to despair, but he despaired not.  He believed, and in
spite of all, recognized the high harmony of the world.  He had found
the path for his soul, the work for his mind, by which he got rid of
the weight which crushed him, and at the same time took his proud
revenge on the men who had so maltreated him.  In "eternal letters of
fire" he wrote his terrible judgment "as lightning writes its cipher
on the rocks" to be read by all posterity, that men might one day fix
the balance between this one man on the one side and mankind on the
other' [^Dante and his Time~, pp. 267-268.  The `twenty-two years' is a
slip for twenty.  The first sentence of banishment is dated January 27,
1301/2, and the date of Dante's death is September 14, 1321.  It is to
be remembered that the Florentine year began on March 25, and therefore
in the foregoing mode of writing the year (1301/2) the upper figure
represents the old method of reckoning, and the lower the modern].
Nevertheless he is not to be pitied; it was this furnace of suffering
which burnt away the dross and left the gold.  Had he never been driven
into exile and `held heartbreak at bay', the great poem which `made him
lean for many a year' [^Par.~ xxv. 1-3] would have remained
unwritten.  Entangled and lost in the `dark and savage wood,' the
paltry ambitions, quarrels, and vices of his city, he might never have
become a pilgrim of the invisible.  The spirit of faction never did a
nobler service to the world than when Florence, that `mother of little
love,' disowned her son and flung him out upon the universal hopes and
fears, sins, sorrows, and aspirations of mankind, to steer his course
by nothing lower than the steadfast stars.  It was not Brunetto Latini,
`dear and good and fatherly,' but his long exile, cruel and relentless,
that taught Dante `in the world from hour to hour how man makes himself
eternal' [^Inf.~ xv. 82-85].
..TEXT:
<<<FORMATTING-OFF>>>
     How it was possible in the midst of this distracted, homeless,
<<<FORMATTING-ON>>>
wandering life to gather the stores of encyclopaedic knowledge and to
shape them into the ordered unity and symbolism of the ^Commedia~, must
remain a mystery and a miracle.  All interpretation of the poem must
start from the Epistle in which Dante dedicates the ^Paradiso~ to his
former host, Can Grande of Verona, and gives his own commentary on part
of the first Canto.  [This statement is true whether the Letter is
authentic or not.  Its genuineness is questioned chiefly on the grounds
of its absence from old MSS., and the silence of Boccaccio and other
early commentators.  If authentic -- and it is far from being proved
that it is not -- it is pathetic to find Dante abruptly ending the
exposition because of poverty: `In particular I will not expound it at
present; for poverty presseth so hard upon me that I must needs abandon
these and other matters useful for the public good.  But I hope of your
magnificence that other means may be given me of continuing with a
useful exposition' (par. 32).]  The title of the whole poem, he says,
is -- `The Comedy of Dante Alighieri, a Florentine by birth, not by
character.'  [`The title ^Divina Commedia~ is subsequent to Dante; it
appears in some of the oldest MSS. and in Boccaccio's "Vita di Dante"'
(Toynbee).]  He explains why it is called a Comedy.  Tragedy is in its
beginning `admirable and quiet,' and in its ending `foul and horrible';
whereas Comedy, reversing this, begins with some asperity and ends
prosperously.  There is also a difference in the manner of speech,
Tragedy using a style `lofty and sublime,' while that of Comedy is
`weak and humble.'  `From this it is evident why the present work is
called a comedy.  For if we consider the theme, in its beginning it is
horrible and foul, because it is Hell; in its ending, fortunate,
desirable, and joyful, because it is Paradise; and if we consider the
style of language, the style is careless and humble, because it is the
vulgar tongue, in which even housewives hold converse' [^Letter~ x. 10.
In ^De Vulg. Eloq.~ (ii. 4) he gives a very different account of
Tragedy and Comedy].  He warns us that the meaning is not simple but
manifold: `For the clearness, therefore, of what I shall say, it must
be understood that the meaning of this work is not simple, but rather
can be said to be of many significations (^polysemum~), that is, of
several meanings; for there is one meaning tht is derived from the
letter, and another that is derived from the things signified by the
letter.  The first is called ^literal~, but the second ^allegorical~ or
^mystical.~  That this method of expounding may be more clearly set
forth, we may consider it in these lines: "When Israel went out of
Egypt, the house of Jacob from a barbarous people, Judah was His
sanctuary, and Israel His dominion."  For if we consider the ^letter~
alone, the departure of the children of Israel from Egypt in the time
of Moses is signified; if the ^allegory~, our redemption accomplished
in Christ is signified; if the ^moral meaning~, the conversion of the
soul from the sorrow and misery of sin to a state of grace is
signified; if the ^anagogical~, the departure of the sanctified soul
from the bondage of this corruption to the liberty of eternal glory is
signified.  And although these mystical meanings are called by various
names, they can in general all be said to be allegorical, since they
differ from the literal or historic; for the word ^Allegoria~ is
derived from the Greek (%alpha%lambda%lambda%o%iota%o%varsigma\), which
in Latin is ^alienum~ or ^diversum' [^Letter~ x. 7; see ^Conv.~ ii. 1,
where he expounds the same four senses at greater length.  Also
Aquinas, ^Summa~ i. q. l. a. 10].  At first sight this seems to make
confusion worse confounded: how is a plain man to make his way through
this labyrinth of manifold senses?  And doubtless `the art of
misunderstanding Dante' is easy enough.  Nevertheless the task of
interpretation is not so difficult as it looks.  These manifold senses
are reducible to two with which every mind is familiar -- the ^literal~
and the ^moral and spiritual~.  The moral and spiritual significance of
the ^Commedia~ is not really obscure or uncertain, so far at least as
its broad outlines are concerned.  However Dante may conceal his
meaning `under the veil of the mysterious verses' and the embarrasing
riches of detail, the meaning when discovered is found to be the plain
broad highway of common morality and religion.  To this highway it is
the duty of an expositor to keep, refusing resolutely to be tempted too
far down any of the picturesque and interesting lanes and by-paths,
which almost invariably end in some ^cul-de-sac~ of private
interpretation.  In doing so, he will best fulfill the plain practical
purposes which Dante, as the poet of Righteousness [^De Vulg. Eloq.~
ii. 2.], expressly professes: `The subject of the whole work, taken
according to the letter alone, is simply a consideration of the state
of souls after death; for from and around this the action of the whole
work turneth.  But if the work is considered according to its
allegorical meaning, the subject is man, liable to the reward or
punishment of Justice, according as through the freedom of the will he
is deserving or undeserving....  Omitting all subtle investigation, it
can be briefly stated that the aim of the whole and of the part is to
remove those living in this life from a state of misery, and to guide
them to a state of happiness' [^Letter~ x. 8, 15.  In his ^Dante
Dictionary~, Toynbee says: `In the light of the fivefold
interpretation of the ^Commedia~ indicated in his Letter to Can Grande
(Epis. x. 7), Dante, as he appears in the poem, represents in the
literal sense the Florentine Dante Alighieri; in the allegorical, Man
on his earthly pilgrimage; in the moral, Man turning from vice to
virtue; in the religious, the Sinner turning to God; in the anagogical,
the Soul passing from a state of sin to that of glory'].
..AUTH:
..PUBL:
..EDTR:
..ATTR:
..NOTE:
..DENT:
..CNTO:
..LINE:
..ENDL:
..LRNG:
..REFS:
..BTXT:
..TCHR:
