{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}
{\f3\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\s1 \qj _26;}
{\s2 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _25;}
{\s3 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _24;}
{\s4 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _23;}
{\s5 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _22;}
{\s6 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _21;}
{\s7 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _20;}
{\s8 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _19;}
{\s9 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _18;}
{\s10 \qj\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _17;}
{\s11 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _16;}
{\s12 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _15;}
{\s13 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _14;}
{\s14 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _13;}
{\s15 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _12;}
{\s16 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _11;}
{\s17 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _10;}
{\s18 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _9;}
{\s19 \qj\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _8;}
{\s20 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _7;}
{\s21 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _6;}
{\s22 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _5;}
{\s23 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _4;}
{\s24 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _3;}
{\s25 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _2;}
{\s26 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _1;}
{\s27 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz914\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 03}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-9.}{\plain \fs24   Modern editions vary in using capital or lower-case letters for this inscription over \softline
the gate of hell.  Lacking Dante's autograph MS, we can only conjecture.  For the view that the \softline
model for these words is found in the victorious inscriptions found on Roman triumphal arches, \softline
sculpted in capital letters in stone, see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Princeton, \softline
Princeton University Press, 1969]), p. 300.  In this view every condemned sinner is being led \softline
back captive to 'that Rome of which Christ is Roman' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXXII.102), 'under the yoke' into \softline
God's holy kingdom, where he or she will be eternally a prisoner.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-3.}{\plain \fs24   For the city as the poem's centering image of political life, the hellish earthly city, \softline
resembling Florence, 'which stands for the self and against the common good,' and the heavenly \softline
city, an idealized view of imperial Rome, see Joan Ferrante (}{\plain \fs24 \i The Political Vision of the "Divine \softline
Comedy"}{\plain \fs24  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984]), pp. 41-42.  The anaphora, or repetition, \softline
of the phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i per me si va}{\plain \fs24 , as it comes 'uttered' by the gate of hell itself in the first three verses, \softline
has a ring of inevitable doom about it.  A student (Charlene Cosman, Princeton '76) once \softline
suggested that it also contains a self-conscious gesture on the part of its author: it is }{\plain \fs24 \i through him}{\plain \fs24  \softline
that we visit this place of woe, suffering, and perdition.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 4.}{\plain \fs24   'Justice moved my maker on high.'  Dante's verse may seem to violate the \softline
Aristotelian/Thomist definition of God as the 'unmoved mover.'  Strictly speaking, }{\plain \fs24 \i nothing}{\plain \fs24  can \softline
'move' God, who Himself moves all things (even if He can be described in the Bible as feeling \softline
anger at humankind, etc.).  Dante's apparently 'theologically incorrect' statement shows the \softline
importance of his sense of justice as the central force in the universe, so encompassing that it \softline
may be seen as, in a sense, God's 'muse,' as well as the primary subject of the poem.  The word \softline
in its noun form appears fully thirty-five times in the poem (once in Latin at }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XVIII.91).  See \softline
Allan H. Gilbert (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante's Conception of Justice}{\plain \fs24  [Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1925] -- \softline
but see also Dino Bigongiari's sharply critical review [}{\plain \fs24 \i Essays on Dante and Medieval Culture}{\plain \fs24 , \softline
ed. Henry Paolucci (New York: The Bagehot Council, 2000 [1964]), pp. 86-91] and Hollander, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante and Paul's "five words with understanding}{\plain \fs24 ," Occasional Papers, No. 1, Center for \softline
Medieval and Early Renaissance Texts and Studies [Binghamton, NY: Medieval and \softline
Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1992], pp. 40-41).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 5-6.}{\plain \fs24   The three attributes of the Christian God, Power, Wisdom, and Love, are nearly \softline
universally recognized as informing these two verses.  Hell is of God's making, not an \softline
independent 'city' of rebels, but a totally dependent }{\plain \fs24 \i polis}{\plain \fs24  of those who had rebelled against their \softline
maker.  For the post-biblical concept of the Trinity, especially as it was advanced in St. \softline
Augustine's }{\plain \fs24 \i De Trinitate}{\plain \fs24 , where Father, Son, and Holy Spirit is each identified by one of these \softline
attributes, respectively, see G. Fallani, "Trinit{\f2 \'42}" (ED.1976.5), pp. 718-21.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 7-8.}{\plain \fs24   The apparent difficulty of these verses (perhaps reflected in Dante's difficulty in \softline
understanding the writing over the gate,}{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.12) is resolved once we understand that here \softline
'eternal' is used to mean 'sempiternal,' that is, as having had a beginning in time but lasting ever \softline
after.  Only God, who is not created but all-creating, may be considered eternal.  See Mazzoni \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: \softline
Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 331-36.  Mazzoni, in agreement with Bruno Nardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i La caduta di Lucifero e 
l'autenticit{\f2 \'42} della "Quaestio de aqua et terra}{\plain \fs24 " [Torino, S.E.I. (Lectura Dantis Romana): 1959] -- \softline
now in Nardi, }{\plain \fs24 \i "Lecturae" e altri studi danteschi}{\plain \fs24 , ed. R. Abardo [Firenze: Le Lettere, 1990], p. \softline
17), allows this status to three classes of being: angels, prime matter (that is, the potential form \softline
of the as yet uncreated world), and the heavenly spheres.  For an apt description of Christ's \softline
Judgment of the damned, see Matthew 25:41, 25:46: 'Then shall he say also unto them on the left \softline
hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels....  \softline
And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 9.}{\plain \fs24   A curiosity about which there has been only a modicum of speculation results from \softline
the closeness of this verse to one in the opening verses of the first scene of the third act of \softline
Plautus's comedy }{\plain \fs24 \i Bacchides}{\plain \fs24 : 'Pandite atque aperite propere ianuam hanc Orci, opsecro: Nam \softline
equidem haud aliter esse duco: quippe quo nemo advenit Nisi quem }{\plain \fs24 \i spes reliquere omnes}{\plain \fs24 .'  For \softline
the first modern discussion see Edward Moore, }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 , First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i Scripture and \softline
Classical Authors in Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 [1896]), p. 261n., and now R. Mercuri, \softline
"Plauto" (ED.1973.4), p. 555b.  For a much earlier citation, see Castelvetro (comm. to}{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.9-10).  There is general agreement that Dante could not have known the texts of Plautus directly \softline
(he does, however, name the Roman playwright at }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXII.98), with the resultant \softline
understanding that Dante found the lines cited in one }{\plain \fs24 \i florilegium}{\plain \fs24  or another, even if no one has \softline
as yet produced such a manuscript in order to confirm this theory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 10.}{\plain \fs24   Are the letters of these words 'dark in hue,' as are the inset carvings over actual gates, \softline
begrimed by time (or, as some early commentators urged, because they are hellishly menacing)?  \softline
Or are they rhetorically difficult, and 'dark' in that respect?  The phrase 'rhetorical colors' to \softline
indicate the rhetor's stylistic techniques is familiar from classical rhetoric and is found in Dante, \softline
e.g., in }{\plain \fs24 \i Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24  XXV.7 and XXV.10.  (For this usage in Dante see Domenico Consoli, \softline
"colore" [ED.1970.2], p. 65b.)  Most of the early commentators are drawn, however, to the first \softline
hypothesis (dark in color), while several recent ones prefer the latter.  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un \softline
nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), \softline
pp. 337-42, gives good reasons for favoring the ancient interpretation, opposing the reading \softline
offered by Pagliaro (}{\plain \fs24 \i Ulisse}{\plain \fs24 : }{\plain \fs24 \i ricerche semantiche sulla "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Messina-Florence: \softline
D'Anna, 1967]), pp. 762-65.  One should also consider the possibility that both meanings are \softline
present here.  In any case, whichever understanding one chooses, one will have to make a \softline
decision consonant with an interpretation of verse 12 (see the note to}{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.12).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 12.}{\plain \fs24   There is a fairly serious disagreement over the most probable interpretation of the \softline
words 'for me their meaning is hard.'  Our translation tries to reflect both possibilities, suggesting \softline
that one is clearly present, while the second may be only latent.  Are the words over the gate of \softline
hell (1) threatening to Dante?  Or (2) are they hard for him to understand?  It seems clear that the \softline
traveler is frightened by the dire advice tendered in verse 9, which would have him abandon all \softline
hope.  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  \softline
[Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 337-42, offers a lengthy gloss to this tercet (vv. 10-12 -- see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.10).  It seems impossible not to accept his basic premise, namely that the context \softline
of the scene makes the meaning immediate and moral: the traveler is afraid, and Virgil reproves \softline
him for his fear (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.14-15).  This understanding is shared by the vast majority of the \softline
commentators, with a very few (the Ottimo, Boccaccio, Gregorio Di Siena) arguing for the \softline
understanding that the text insists only that Dante finds the meaning of the inscription difficult, 
and another handful arguing for a deliberately ambiguous meaning.  Critics like John Freccero, \softline
in his essay 'Infernal Irony: The Gates of Hell' (1983) in (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 , ed. \softline
Rachel Jacoff [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986], pp. 99-102), argue that the drama \softline
played out here is lodged in the difficulty of interpreting.  Without opposing that further \softline
interpretive dimension of the scene, one should probably insist on a literal understanding that \softline
squares with the text.  Freccero and others before him (e.g., Vandelli [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.12]; \softline
Padoan [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.12]) have heard the echo of John 6:60: 'Durus est hic sermo' (This is a \softline
hard saying).  But that context also, while allowing for the question of interpretive failure on the \softline
part of the disciples who do not understand what Jesus means when he says that those who eat of \softline
his flesh shall live forever, is rounded off by the }{\plain \fs24 \i moral}{\plain \fs24  failure of certain disciples (John 6:61; \softline
6:66).  For Dante, the seeming banishment of his hope is cause, not so much for distress at his \softline
intellectual failure so much as for fear of a punishment compelling enough to grasp -- an eternity \softline
in hell.  See Guiniforto delli Bargigi (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.10-12), paraphrasing the protagonist's \softline
remark as follows: 'non dico dura, perch'io non la intenda, ma dura {\f2 \'50}, perocch{\f2 \'50} dura cosa mi pare \softline
udir che io debba entrare in luogo di eterno dolore e lasciar la speranza di uscirne mai fuori, e \softline
per questo denota Dante, ch'ei temesse, e Virgilio lo confort{\f2 \'62} nella particella del testo che \softline
seguita.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 13-15.}{\plain \fs24   The comparison (}{\plain \fs24 \i come persona accorta}{\plain \fs24 ) lends Virgil authority in two regards: he \softline
is aware of Dante's moral shortcomings and he understands the underworld, since he has \softline
descended once before (see}{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IX.22-27; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXI.63).  The scene indeed has a classical \softline
precursor, as was noted, among the early commentators, by Boccaccio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.13-15): \softline
the Sibyl's reassurance of threatened Aeneas (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . VI.261): 'Nunc animis opus, Aenea, nunc \softline
pectore firmo.'  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), p. 342, follows the tradition in the commentaries which \softline
argues that this tercet reaffirms the moral reading of }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.12, 'Maestro, il senso lor m'{\f2 \'50} duro.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 18.}{\plain \fs24   The 'good of the intellect' has long been understood as God.  See Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di \softline
un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), \softline
p. 343, citing }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . IV.116, where God is the 'fonte ond' ogne ver deriva' (the source from which \softline
all truth derives).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 21.}{\plain \fs24   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i segrete}{\plain \fs24  here does not mean 'secret' so much as 'cut off from' -- see Grabher \softline
(comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.21): '}{\plain \fs24 \i Segrete}{\plain \fs24  conserva la sua forza etimologica (da }{\plain \fs24 \i secerno}{\plain \fs24  [Latin 'separate \softline
from, cut off']) con immagine netta di separazione; qui: dal mondo e dalla conoscenza degli \softline
uomini' (cited by Mazzoni [}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  (Florence: Sansoni, 1967), p. 345]), i.e., those things that are hidden from the \softline
knowledge of mortals.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 22-30.}{\plain \fs24   This first sense impression of the underworld is exclusively aural.  We are \softline
probably meant to assume that Dante's eyes are not yet accustomed to the darkness of hell.  Cf. \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.25-27 as well as }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XI.11, where his olfactory capacity must become used to the stench \softline
of nether hell.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\sect \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta )}}

\pard \fs24\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640
{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 24.}{\plain \fs24   This first instance of Dante's weeping is part of a program of the protagonist's \softline
development in hell, in which he (very) gradually overcomes the twin temptations to weep for or 
feel fear at the situation of the sinners in Inferno.  See Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 ), pp. 301-7.  In the harsh moral code of the text, sympathy for the damned is \softline
always misplaced, if a certain admiration for some of their better qualities is allowed.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 25.}{\plain \fs24   The adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i diverse}{\plain \fs24  here means either 'different the one from the other' (on the \softline
model of the confused languages spoken after the construction of the Tower of Babel) or \softline
'strange,' a meaning for the adjective frequently found in Dante.  In our translation we have tried \softline
to allow for both meanings.  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), p. 348, gives further evidence for the first \softline
interpretation by citing}{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.123, where those who die in the wrath of God 'assemble here from \softline
every land,' a phrasing that calls attention to differing nationalities and thus suggests a plurality \softline
of tongues.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b \tab 27.  E suon di man con elle}{\plain \fs24 .  Boccaccio's gloss (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IX.49-51) to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IX.50, \softline
'battiensi a palme,' which describes the Furies beating their breasts 'come qui [on earth] fanno le \softline
femine che gran dolor sentono, o mostran di sentire,' may help unravel this verse as well: the \softline
sound is that of hands striking the sinners' own bodies as they beat their breasts, as Boccaccio \softline
had already suggested in his gloss to this verse: 'come soglion far le femine battendosi a palme' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.27-29).  See M. Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), p. 267.  \softline
Others today (e.g., Bosco/Reggio [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.27]) allow for two possibilities: the sound \softline
results from striking either the body of another or one's own.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 31.}{\plain \fs24   A much-debated verse.  Here our translation follows Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia \softline
secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 , Introduzione), pp. 168-69, who reads (}{\plain \fs24 \i error}{\plain \fs24  and not }{\plain \fs24 \i orror}{\plain \fs24 ), even \softline
though we agree with Giorgio Brugnoli ("}{\plain \fs24 \i Orror}{\plain \fs24 /}{\plain \fs24 \i Error}{\plain \fs24  [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  III.31],"}{\plain \fs24 \i  Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  54 \softline
[1982], pp. 15-30), that this is a likely echo of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  (II.559): 'At me tum primum \softline
circumstetit horror.'  There are detailed discussions of the debate over the verse in Mazzoni \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: \softline
Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 352-55; in Petrocchi, (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 , pp. \softline
42-43); and in Maria Simonelli (}{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis Americana: "Inferno" III}{\plain \fs24  [Philadelphia: \softline
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993], pp. 27-30.  As Petrocchi says, both readings are \softline
acceptable: there is not so much at stake here.  Nonetheless, the view of John Taaffe is worth \softline
noting (}{\plain \fs24 \i A Comment on the "Divine Comedy" of Dante Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  [London, John Murray, 1822]), \softline
p. 171: '...I tend to accept [}{\plain \fs24 \i orror}{\plain \fs24 ] without reserve, not because it is the most intelligible and \softline
poetical... on what I take to be the very best possible authority -- that of Boccaccio.'  (The \softline
recovery of Taaffe's all-but-forgotten English commentary to the first eight cantos is a bonus \softline
found in Simonelli's discussion.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 34-36.}{\plain \fs24   For the history of the interpretation of this tercet, now generally understood to \softline
indicate the presence in the 'ante-inferno,' or vestibule of hell, of the neutrals, those who never \softline
took a side, see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 355-67.  And, for the existence of exactly such a \softline
'vestibule' in hell in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Visio Pauli}{\plain \fs24  see Theodore Silverstein ("Did Dante Know the Vision of St. \softline
Paul?" }{\plain \fs24 \i Harvard Studies and Notes in Philology and Literature}{\plain \fs24  19 [1937], pp. 231-47).  In Paul's \softline
apocryphal Vision (for the most recent text see Silverstein and Anthony Hilhorst, eds., \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Apocalypse of Paul: A New Critical Edition of Three Long Latin Versions}{\plain \fs24  [Geneva: Patrick 
Cramer, 1997]), there is a river of flame separating 'those who were neither hot nor cold' (Apoc. \softline
3:15-16) from the other sinners.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 37-39.}{\plain \fs24   There has been a lengthy dispute in the commentary tradition as to whether or not \softline
Dante has invented the neutral angels or is reflecting a medieval tradition that had itself \softline
'invented' them (since they are not, properly speaking, biblical in origin).  This is presented at \softline
length by Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 368-76, who shows that such a tradition did exist and \softline
probably helped to shape Dante's conceptualization.  On this problem see Nardi, }{\plain \fs24 \i Dal "Convivio" \softline
alla "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  (Rome: Istituto Storico Italiano per il Medio Evo, 1992 [1960]), pp. 331-50.  \softline
See also Freccero's essay 'The Neutral Angels' (1960) in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 , ed. \softline
Rachel Jacoff (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986), pp. 110-18.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 40-42.}{\plain \fs24   To what does the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i rei}{\plain \fs24  ('evil') refer?  The neutral angels (v. 38) are the \softline
antecedent of the pronoun }{\plain \fs24 \i li}{\plain \fs24  in vv. 40 and 41.  It seems clear that this is also true with respect to \softline
the adjective in v. 42, and thus our translation, 'lest on their account the evil angels gloat.'  The \softline
sense is that the fallen angels (e.g., those seen on the walls of Dis in canto VIII.82-83) would be \softline
able to take pride in their higher situation if the neutral angels were admitted to hell, since they \softline
would apparently be lower down even than their rebellious cousins.  That the adjective is to be \softline
treated as an adjectival noun for 'the wicked,' i.e., the damned in general, is an idea that has only \softline
entered commentaries in our own century.  It has not won over the more convincing discussants.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 42.}{\plain \fs24   For the less-than-defensible notion that }{\plain \fs24 \i alcuna}{\plain \fs24  here is a negative (rather than a \softline
positive) form of the adjective see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina \softline
Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 377-79, who defends the \softline
positive reading.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46.}{\plain \fs24   Paraphrased: 'Like all the rest, these sinners have no hope of improving their \softline
posthumous lot; but their foul condition is such that they are envious of every other class of \softline
sinners.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 50.}{\plain \fs24   }{\plain \fs24 \i Misericordia e giustizia}{\plain \fs24  ('Mercy and justice') are here to be understood as heaven \softline
and hell, neither of which will entertain any report of such vile creatures.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 52-57.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's essential technique for indicating the crucial moral failures of his various \softline
groups of sinners is here before us for the first time.  The neutrals, who never took a side, are \softline
portrayed as an organized crowd following a banner: exactly what they were not in life (e.g., the \softline
neutral angels who neither rebelled directly against God nor stood with Him, but who kept to one \softline
side).  And in this respect the neutrals are punished by being forced to assume a pose antithetic \softline
to that which they struck in life.  At the same time, the banner that they follow is the very \softline
essence of indeterminacy.  Not only is there no identifying sign on it, but is not held in the \softline
anchoring hand of any standard-bearer; it is a parody of the standard that is raised before a body \softline
of men who follow a leader.  Elsewhere we will encounter other such symbolic artifacts.  In \softline
Dante's hell the punishment of sin involves the application of opposites and similarities.  Here \softline
the sinners do the opposite of what they did (form into an organized group) and the same (follow \softline
no fixed purpose).  This form of just retribution is what Dante will later refer to as the 
}{\plain \fs24 \i contrapasso}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVIII.142).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 54.}{\plain \fs24   The word in rhyme position, }{\plain \fs24 \i indegna}{\plain \fs24 , has caused some anxiety.  In what way is the \softline
banner 'unworthy' of repose?  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), p. 388, proposes understanding the word as \softline
having the meaning 'insusceptible.'  This banner, by its very nature, seems incapable of ever \softline
coming to rest.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-60.}{\plain \fs24   The most-debated passage of this canto, at least in the modern era.  Many of the \softline
early commentators were convinced that this passage clearly intended a biting reference to Pope \softline
Celestine V (Pier da Morrone), who abdicated the papacy in 1294 after having held the office for \softline
less than four months.  He was followed into it by Dante's great ecclesiastical enemy, Pope \softline
Boniface VIII, and there are colorful contemporary accounts that would have it that Boniface \softline
mimicked the voice of the Holy Spirit in the air passages that led to Celestine's bed chamber, \softline
counseling his abdication.  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 390-415, offers a thorough history of the \softline
interpretation of the verse.  Two factors led to growing uneasiness with the identification of \softline
Celestine: (1) in 1313 he had been canonized, (2) ca. 1346 Francesco Petrarca, in his }{\plain \fs24 \i De vita \softline
solitaria}{\plain \fs24 , had defended the motives for his abdication.  Thus, beginning with the second \softline
redaction of the commentary of Pietro di Dante, certainty that the vile self-recuser was Celestine \softline
began to waiver.  The names of many others have been proposed, including those of Esau and \softline
Pontius Pilate.  It seems fair to say that there are fatal objections to all of these other candidacies.  \softline
For strong, even convincing, support for that of Celestine see Giorgio Padoan ("Colui che fece \softline
per vilt{\f2 \'42} il gran rifiuto," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  38 [1961], pp. 75-128) and Maria Simonelli (}{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura \softline
Dantis Americana: "Inferno" III}{\plain \fs24  [Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993]), pp. 41-58.  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  \softline
[Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 414-15, ends his lengthy study of the problem opting for (as had \softline
Sapegno [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.59-60] before him), a generic sinner, unspecified, but standing for all \softline
who had made so vile a choice.  Yet Mazzoni's own evidence and arguments, as well as Dante's \softline
usual procedures, which tend to avoid such indeterminacy, help to convince this reader that it \softline
was indeed Celestine that Dante had in mind, as is underlined by his later scathing reference to \softline
the event of 'the great refusal' in}{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.104-105.  Further, Dante tells us that he 'saw and \softline
knew' (that is, recognized) this shade: there is nothing indeterminate in such a locution.  Nardi's \softline
telling objections to Petrocchi's denial that Dante would have put Celestine, canonized in 1313, \softline
in hell (}{\plain \fs24 \i Itinerari danteschi}{\plain \fs24  [Milan: Franco Angeli, 1994 (1969) pp. 41-59], first published in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Romani}{\plain \fs24  in 1955) are today found in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dal "Convivio" alla "Commedia,"}{\plain \fs24  pp. 315-30.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 62.}{\plain \fs24   M. Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), p. 203: here \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i cattivi}{\plain \fs24  means 'vile ones,' a stronger meaning than the word has sometimes in early (or in modern) \softline
Italian.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 64-69.}{\plain \fs24   The second descriptive passage that indicates the condition of these sinners \softline
continues the }{\plain \fs24 \i contrapasso}{\plain \fs24  (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVIII.142).  Now we see that these beings, who lacked all \softline
inner stimulation, are stung (}{\plain \fs24 \i stimolati}{\plain \fs24 ) by noxious insects.  Their tears mix with the blood drawn \softline
by these wounds only to serve as food for worms.  Dante's personal hatred for those who, unlike \softline
him, never made their true feelings or opinions known irradiates this canto.  There is not a single 
detail that falls short of the condition of eternal insult.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 64.}{\plain \fs24   M. Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), p. 261: }{\plain \fs24 \i sciaurati}{\plain \fs24  \softline
must be understood as 'vile, abbietto, da niente,' as a bitterly negative term with no softness in it.  \softline
Similarly, the phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i che mai non fur vivi}{\plain \fs24  (who never were alive) is darkened by its probable \softline
source, cited by several modern commentators (perhaps first by Sapegno [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.64], \softline
in Revelation 3:1: 'Nomen habes quod vivas, et mortuus es' (you have the name of the living, and \softline
are dead), a fitting castigation for Dante to have had in mind for the neutrals.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 70-71.}{\plain \fs24   These verses mark a split between the second and third scenes of the canto, the \softline
neutrals and those other sinners, of all kinds, who are destined to begin their travel to their final \softline
destinations in Charon's bark.  From this point on the action of the canto moves to the near bank \softline
of Acheron.  The next canto will begin on the other side of the river. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 72-75.}{\plain \fs24   Dante asks two things of his guide, the identity of those gathered at the river's \softline
bank and the reason for their apparent eagerness to cross over.  His questions seem more or less \softline
similar to those he had asked at}{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.33, when he wanted to know the identity of the wailing \softline
souls who turn out to be the neutrals.  On that occasion, Virgil answers him immediately; on this, \softline
as we soon see, he is much less forthcoming.  See the note, below, to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.76-78).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 73-75.}{\plain \fs24   Many commentators, beginning perhaps with Trifon Gabriele (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
III.72), followed by his student, Bernardino Daniello (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.70-81), cite apposite \softline
lines from Virgil (Aen. VI.318-319), Aeneas's inquiry of the Sibyl as to the motives leading the \softline
dead to desire to cross Acheron: 'dic,' ait, 'o virgo, quid volt concursus ad amnem? / quidve \softline
petunt animae?'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 73.}{\plain \fs24   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i costume}{\plain \fs24 , which we have translated as 'inner law,' is explained by Sapegno \softline
(comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.73) as 'istinto diventato norma e legge' (an instinct become a norm, even a \softline
law).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 75.}{\plain \fs24   The 'dim light': Dante's first experience of hell proper was one of utter darkness.  \softline
Indeed, his first sense impressions of the neutrals are entirely auditory (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.22-33).  Now the \softline
character himself assures us that he can see at least a little.  'In this third canto, Dante had to \softline
arrive at this solution: after beginning in an absolute darkness that forced him to perceive the \softline
external world only through sound, he begins to see once he passes the infernal gate and his eyes \softline
adapt to the darkness.  Now he speaks of 'dim light,' thus resolving the problem of vision in a \softline
world without light, in the world of eternal darkness' (Maria Simonelli [}{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis \softline
Americana: "Inferno" III}{\plain \fs24  (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1993)], p. 61).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 76-78.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's rather clipped response, in marked contrast with his ready response to \softline
Dante's question about the identity of the neutrals (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.34-42), causes Dante to feel ashamed \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.79-81).  The exact reason for Virgil's reproof is a matter of some debate.  One might \softline
argue that his point is that Dante has gotten ahead of himself.  In the first instance, he asked \softline
about the nature of those he saw displayed just before him.  Now he is anticipating, literally \softline
looking ahead, and Virgil warns him against such behavior.  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo \softline
commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 419-22, surveys the dispute, which probably began with Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.76-78).  Perhaps the most interesting hypothesis was advanced by Mattalia (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.76-78), who argued that Virgil is upset that Dante, who had offered himself as a devoted reader of \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.82-86), does not recognize this place, so fully described by Virgil in his Sixth \softline
Book.  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  \softline
[Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 420-21, disagrees, finding this argument over-subtle.  We can \softline
say that once Virgil is ready to respond, he is courtesy itself (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.121-129).  The point seems \softline
to be that he now wants Dante first to observe Charon, whose words and actions will make many \softline
things clear, before getting into the details of this scene along the river's edge.  Nonetheless, \softline
Mattalia's point does seem to have some merit, particularly because Dante's guide mentions the \softline
name of the river (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.78), 'Acheronte.'  Had he not wanted to remind Dante of the Virgilian \softline
roots of this current experience of an underworld, would he not have merely said, 'the river,' \softline
leaving the identification for later?  This small moment of interpretive difficulty may stand as \softline
but one example of two things: the difficulty of this poem and the extraordinarily subtle \softline
exertions it calls forth from its commentators, whether its author always hoped for them or not.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 85.}{\plain \fs24   Charon's address to the wicked souls awaiting transport reinforces the hopelessness \softline
of this place, which was initially insisted on by the writing over the gate of hell (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.9), \softline
'lasciate ogne speranza, voi ch'entrate.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 88.}{\plain \fs24   Charon's insistence on Dante's difference -- he is alive, the others dead -- will find \softline
frequent repetition as the protagonist's extraordinary presence in hell is noted by various \softline
guardians and damned souls.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 91-93.}{\plain \fs24   For complicating readings of what many have understood as a fairly evident \softline
remark, see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti \softline
I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 425-27.  Most today, including Mazzoni, take Charon's \softline
formulation to refer to Dante's eventual passage to Purgatory aboard the angel-guided ship that \softline
we see in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  II.41.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 94.}{\plain \fs24   Charon, introduced first (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.82-83) only by his characteristics (in a typical \softline
Dantean gesture, making us wonder who this imposing figure might be), is now named, and will \softline
be twice more (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.109; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.128).  This highly specified and insistent naming should make \softline
it plain that Dante is serious about proposing the notion that the guardian of hell is derived from \softline
the Sixth Book of Virgil's poem.  It is fascinating, however, to watch the early commentators, so \softline
used to reading any fiction as though it were 'allegorical,' 'dehistoricizing' Charon.  For a brief \softline
resum{\f1\u233\'e9}, see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti \softline
I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 428-31.  Among the early commentators Charon is variously \softline
understood as 'fleshly desire,' 'disordered love,' 'ancient sinfulness,' 'vice,' 'time,' etc.  It is surely \par
}{\plain \fs24 better to understand him first and foremost as himself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 95-96.}{\plain \fs24   These two verses are repeated, word for word, at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno }{\plain \fs24 V.23-24.  This is the \softline
longest example of a word-for-word repetition that we find in the entire poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 104-105.}{\plain \fs24   'The human race, the place, the time, the seed / of their begetting and of their \softline
birth.'  Our translation is in accord with the literal interpretation of Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
III.104), against those who understand }{\plain \fs24 \i seme}{\plain \fs24  to refer to their ancestors, }{\plain \fs24 \i semenza}{\plain \fs24  to their parents.  
For an apposite citation of Job 3:3 ('Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in \softline
which it was said: A man child is conceived') see Eugenio Frongia, "Canto III: The Gate of \softline
Hell," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis: "Inferno," }{\plain \fs24 ed. A. Mandelbaum, A. Oldcorn, and C. Ross (Berkeley: \softline
University of California Press, 1998), p. 47.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b \tab 109.}{\plain \fs24   For Dante's possible reliance, in his description of Charon's eyes, on the }{\plain \fs24 \i Roman \softline
d'En{\f1\u233\'e9}as}{\plain \fs24 , v. 2449 ('roges les oitz come charbons'), see Barbara Spaggiari, "Antecedenti e modelli \softline
tipologici nella letteratura in lingua d'o{\f2 \'56}l," in }{\plain \fs24 \i I "monstra" nell'"Inferno" dantesco: tradizione e \softline
simbologie}{\plain \fs24  (Spoleto: Centro italiano di studi sull'alto medioevo, 1997), pp. 134-35.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 111.}{\plain \fs24   The verb }{\plain \fs24 \i s'adagia}{\plain \fs24  has been variously interpreted, either to mean that the souls delay \softline
entering Charon's skiff, or that, once in it, they seat themselves in so self-indulgent a manner as \softline
to draw Charon's wrath.  See Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 438-42, for a thorough review of the \softline
debate and the evidence in favor of the second reading, based in Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . VI.411-412): 'inde \softline
alias animas, quae per iuga longa sedebant, / deturbat laxatque foros,' as was first noted by N. \softline
Tommaseo (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.109-111).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 112-120.}{\plain \fs24   Where each of the first two cantos has had two major similes (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.22-27; }{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
I.55-60; }{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . II.37-42; }{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . II.127-132), the third canto reserves its similetic energy for this \softline
double simile that describes the final action of the canto, the departure of the sinners in Charon's \softline
skiff.  It is a commonplace that the third canto is the most 'Virgilian' canto of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 .  In \softline
fact, study has shown that it has more than twice as many Virgilian citations than any other canto \softline
in the poem (see Hollander, "Le opere di Virgilio nella }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24  di Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e la "bella \softline
scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f2 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 , ed. A. A. Iannucci [Ravenna: Longo, 1993],  pp. \softline
250-51).  This double simile has long been recognized as involving an amalgam of two Virgilian \softline
passages, }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  VI.309-312 and }{\plain \fs24 \i Georgics}{\plain \fs24  II.82.  It has also been understood as being the \softline
'controling simile' for the entire poem, combining pagan and Christian elements: see the article \softline
by Margherita Frankel ("Biblical Figurations in Dante's Reading of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  \softline
100 [1982], pp. 13-23).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 125-126.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil now is willing to answer the question that Dante posed earlier (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
III.73-74): divine justice spurs these sinners so that they are eager to cross the river and find their \softline
perdition.  If there is merit in Mattalia's observation that Virgil had previously been angry with \softline
Dante for not understanding that the place before them had been amply described in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  \softline
and thus should have been recognized by the traveller (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.76-78), now, we \softline
infer, adding this new information, he is ready to speak.  On the other hand, the simpler \softline
explanation is that the appearance of Charon on the scene was necessary to make his answer \softline
meaningful -- and that condition has now been met.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 130-134.}{\plain \fs24   For the Aristotelian/Thomist sources of Dante's meteorology, the subterranean \softline
winds that cause earthquakes, see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina \par
}{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 446-52.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 136.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's falling into unconsciousness indicates his inability to deal with the \softline
overwhelming experience of his crossing into the realm of hell proper, an 'inability' apparently \softline
shared by the poet, who simply does not tell us how he crossed the river.  The protagonist will 
suffer a similar lapse at the conclusion of the fifth canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.142).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The question of how Dante crosses Acheron is much debated.  The pointed lack of \softline
concrete reference to the means by which he is transported is a sign either of the poet's reticence \softline
or confusion or of his having set a little problem for his readers.  It has become fashionable, on \softline
the heels of the lengthy gloss offered by Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina \softline
Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 452-55, to suggest that the \softline
poet has deliberately left the issue vague.  Wlassics, for instance ("Il canto XV del }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 ," \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i Filologia e critica dantesca: Studi offerti a Aldo Vallone}{\plain \fs24  (Florence: Olschki, 1989), p. 164, \softline
enunciates the principle {\u8219\'27}if Dante does not tell us, we are not meant to know{\u8219\'27} with specific \softline
reference to this crossing.  This reader does not find that an acceptable answer.  The moment is \softline
too important, surrounded by troubling and excited details, to be dealt with as anything less than \softline
a problematic mystery that the poet asks us to solve.  Mazzoni does his usual magisterial job in \softline
reporting the various theories to account for his transporter (Charon, an angel, Virgil, Beatrice, \softline
Lucia, some unnamed supernatural force).  But see the countering argument of Hollander,  \softline
"Dante on Horseback? (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XII, 93-126)," }{\plain \fs24 \i Italica}{\plain \fs24  61 (1984), p. 292: 'We are in fact meant to \softline
understand that it is Charon who takes Dante across and that this }{\plain \fs24 \i crux}{\plain \fs24  is entirely the result of \softline
interpretive over-exertion that has made the self-evident confusing.  Charon indeed does wish to \softline
refuse Dante passage in his skiff (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.88-93); to his protestations Virgil responds as follows \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.94-96): 'Caron, non ti crucciare: / vuolsi cos{\f2 \'58} col{\f2 \'42} dove si puote / ci{\f2 \'62} che si vuole, e pi{\f2 \'6a} \softline
non dimandare.'  Daniello (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.95-96) has offered, in my opinion, a sufficient gloss \softline
to Virgil's words: 'E qui fanno le parole di Virgilio a Caronte quell'effetto che il mostrar \softline
dell'aureo ramo fa della Sibilla...' (Virgil's words have the same effect on Charon that the Sibyl's \softline
showing the golden bough had on him).  For Charon to be able to resist such a command would \softline
involve Dante in a theological or at least a poetic absurdity.  Cf. the similar moment at}{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.16-24, where Minos likewise would resist Dante's passage through his realm and where Virgil \softline
employs the same incantatory phrase that he had uttered in Canto III to achieve the same \softline
result....  Would Virgil have uttered the spell again had it not previously proved efficacious?  \softline
That seems a most doubtful proposition.  I believe that Dante's reason for not permitting us to \softline
witness the first scene being played out (we are given another version of the scene upon which it \softline
is modelled a bit later at}{\plain \fs24 \i  Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VIII.25-27) is that he found that poetic choice an excessive one, too \softline
self-consciously redolent of Aeneas's fanciful entrance into the underworld for him to make \softline
evident reference to it at this important moment, the threshold of his Christian afterworld.'  If this \softline
argument has merit, it accounts for the poet's reticence on poetic grounds.  Dante easily could \softline
have told us what he wants us to make ourselves responsible for; but that is not his way.  Rather, \softline
he makes us his partners in taking responsibility for such incredible details as these all through \softline
this incredible poem.  \par
}{\*\bkmkstart BM_1_}{\*\bkmkend BM_1_}}