{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 02}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Against the common opinion, as it exists even today, most recently exhibited by \softline
Roberto Mercuri ("Il canto II dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  11 [1998], 7-22],}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that the two prolusory \softline
cantos should be regarded as having separate functions (e.g., I = prologue to the poem as a \softline
whole, II = prologue to the first }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), E.H. Wilkins ("The Prologue of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annual Report of the Dante Society}{\plain \fs24 \f1  42 [1926], 1-7) argues, on the basis of discussion of the \softline
defining characteristics of prologues found in the Epistle to Cangrande (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epist}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.43-48), that \softline
cantos I and II form a unitary prologue to the entire poem as well as to its first canticle.  This \softline
reader finds his comments just and convincing.  Once again we observe that commentators, \softline
following earlier commentators rather than the text of the poem, create interpretive artifacts (here, \softline
the notion that the two cantos have separate functions) that then take on, by virtue of repetition, \softline
the appearance of being Dantean 'facts.'  In actuality, all three }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  begin with two-canto-long \softline
prologues containing an invocation, some narrated action, and presentation of details that prepare \softline
the reader for what is to follow further along in the poem.  For instance, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I and II look \softline
forward to Purgatory and Paradise (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.118-129; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.71-74), while }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I \softline
anticipates the ascent to heaven of the saved souls (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.6) as well as the general resurrection \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.75).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the structural parallels that also tend to merge the two cantos into a single entity see \softline
Hollander, "The 'Canto of the Word' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Newberryana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Cherchi \softline
and A. C. Mastrobuono, vol. II (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1990), p. 97:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 II\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 1-27\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab Dante's peril\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 1-42\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab Dante's uncertainty\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 simile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (22-27)\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 simile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (37-40)\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-1440\li1440\tx720\tx1440 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 28-60\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab three beasts\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 43-126\ul0 \tab three blessed ladies\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 simile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (55-58)\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 simile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (127-130)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 61-136\ul0 \tab Virgil's assurances\ul0 \tab 127-142\ul0 \tab Dante's will firmed\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The precise Virgilian text that lies behind Dante's generically 'Virgilian' opening \softline
flourish is debated.  Major candidates include }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.147, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.522-528, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.26-27 \softline
(favored by perhaps a majority), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.224-225, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Geo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.427-428.  See discussion in Mazzoni,  \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: \softline
Sansoni, 1967),  pp. 165-166.  These three lines, as has often been noted, have a sad eloquence \softline
that establishes a mode of writing to which the poet will return when he considers the Virgilian \softline
'tears of things' in the lives of some of his characters.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist, about to descend into hell, is described, perhaps surprisingly, since he \softline
is in the company of Virgil, as being alone ('sol uno').  But see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.xxvi.9, where Dante \softline
describes Aeneas, about to begin his descent }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ad inferos}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , similarly as being 'alone': '...quando esso \softline
Enea sostenette }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 solo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  con Sibilla a entrare ne lo Inferno.'  In Dante's view, it would seem that the \softline
condition of a mortal soul, about to enter the underworld, is one of loneliness, even though it is \softline
accompanied by a shade.  See Hollander, "Le opere di Virgilio nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Dante," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la "bella scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f3 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. A. A. Iannucci (Ravenna: \softline
Longo, 1993), p. 256.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-5.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This formulation perhaps refers to the struggle of the protagonist with the difficulties \softline
of proceeding (his struggles with fearsome exterior forces ranged against him, from the three \softline
beasts in the first canto to Satan in the last) and with his own interior weakness, demonstrated by \softline
his occasional surrender to the emotion of pity (beginning with Francesca in the fifth canto and \softline
ending when he does not yield to Ugolino's entreaties for Dante's pity in the thirty-third).  For a \softline
possible five-part program that marks the development of the protagonist's strength, as he moves \softline
through five cycles of pity and fear in hell, see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), pp. 301-7.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In the words of Singleton's gloss (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.6), 'Memory will now faithfully \softline
retrace the real event of the journey, exactly as it took place.  This most extraordinary journey \softline
through the three realms of the afterlife is represented, never as dreamed or experienced in vision, \softline
but as a real happening....  Here, then, and in the following invocation, the poet's voice is heard \softline
for the first time as it speaks of his task as poet.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The passage including the poem's first invocation is challenging and has caused \softline
serious interpretive difficulty.  Why does Dante invoke the Muses in a Christian work?  What \softline
does }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alto ingegno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (lofty genius) refer to?  Is the invocation of two powers ('Muses' and 'lofty \softline
genius') or of three (the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mente}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or 'memory,' of verse 9)?  For a discussion of these points see \softline
Hollander, "The 'Canto of the Word' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Newberryana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Cherchi \softline
and A. C. Mastrobuono, vol. II (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1990), pp. 98-100.  \softline
The positions taken there have it that the 'muses' are the devices of poetic making that the \softline
individual poet may master (see Grandgent, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II, Introduction: 'Dante probably \softline
believed that the Muses, even to the ancients, were only a figure of speech, a metaphor for poetic \softline
inspiration or art; so in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.9 he says that Horace, calling upon the Muse, "parla... alla sua \softline
scienza medesima"' [speaks... to his own capacities]), that the 'lofty genius' is not Dante's, but \softline
God's, and that only these two elements are invoked, while 'mente' is merely put forward as \softline
having been effective in recording the facts of the journey (and is surely not 'invoked,' as the very \softline
language of the passage makes plain).  In this formulation, here and in some of his later \softline
invocations Dante is asking for divine assistance in conceptualizing the matter of his poem so that \softline
it may resemble his Creator, its source, while also asking for the help of the 'muses' in finding the \softline
most appropriate expressive techniques for that conceptualization.  Thus he is asking for God's \softline
help in shaping the vision and that of the 'muses' in making it rhyme, deploy compelling tropes, \softline
etc.  As for the raw content, that he has through his own experience; he requires no external aid \softline
for it.  What he does need is conceptual and expressive power, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alto ingegno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 arte}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
represented by the 'muses.'  It is worth noting that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ingegno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 arte}{\plain \fs24 \f1  are joined in four later \softline
passages in the poem, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.125, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.130, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.43, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.117.  For a study of \softline
the meaning of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ingegno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in its 27 appearances (twice as the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ingegnare}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Paul Arvisu Dumol, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Metaphysics of Reading Underlying Dante's \softline
"Commedia": The }{\plain \fs24 \i\ul\f1 Ingegno}{\plain \fs24 \b\i\f1  }{\plain \fs24 \f1 (New York: Peter Lang, 1998).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is, given Dante's fondness for the number of Beatrice, nine, difficult to believe that the \softline
fact that there are nine invocations in the poem may be accidental (see Hollander, "The \softline
Invocations of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Yearbook of Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1976], 235-40).  For perhaps the \softline
first reckoning that accounts for all nine invocations see Fabio Fabbri, "Le invocazioni nella \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale dantesco}{\plain \fs24 \f1  18 (1910), 186-92.  It is curious that few commentators 
have noted the fact that there are, in fact, nine invocations (and only nine) in the poem.  (For a \softline
recent miscount see Roberto Mercuri, "Il canto II dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  11 [1998], pp. 7-22.  \softline
They are present as follows: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.7, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.10-12, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.7-12, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.37-42, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
I.13-21, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.83-88, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.112-123, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.97-99, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.67-75.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab That Dante has 'delayed' his invocation has caused notice.  What perhaps has not drawn \softline
notice is that, in a sense, he is 'outdoing' Virgil in this as well.  For Virgil, too, 'delays' his opening \softline
invocation in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , where it only occurs eight lines into the first book (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.8-11), where \softline
Homer's two epics both open with invocations in their very first lines.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This verse begins a series of conversations that give the canto its shape.  With the \softline
exception of the eleventh canto, 92% of which is devoted to dialogue (mainly Virgil's explanations \softline
of the circles of hell, joined by Dante's responses and questions), no other Infernal canto contains \softline
so much dialogue, with 118 of its 142 verses being spoken (83%).  These conversations form a \softline
chiastic pattern (see Hollander, "The 'Canto of the Word' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
Newberryana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Cherchi and A. C. Mastrobuono, vol. II [Evanston: Northwestern University \softline
Press, 1990], p. 100):\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab 1. Dante (10-36)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab 2. Virgil (43-57)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab 3. Beatrice (58-74)\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-4320\li4320\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab    \ul0 \tab    \ul0 \tab    \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 4. Virgil (75-84)\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab 5. Beatrice (85-114)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab 6. Virgil (115-126)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab 7. Dante (133-140)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The meaning of the phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alto passo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is debated.  See Mazzoni,  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo \softline
commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Sansoni, 1967), pp. 180-84, for documentation.  Mazzoni gives good reasons for accepting a literal reading, one that \softline
makes the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 passo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  correspond to the journey, rather than, as some have proposed, a metaphorical \softline
one, in which the it signifies the poem.  Mazzoni paraphrases these words with the phrase 'impresa \softline
eccezionale' (extraordinary undertaking), while also stressing the difficulty of that adventure.  Our \softline
translation seeks a similar solution.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 II.28.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.15) points out that the insistence on the physicality of \softline
Aeneas's descent effectively undercuts that tradition of medieval allegorized Virgil which asserts \softline
that the 'descent' is to be taken as a 'philosophical,' rather than as a literal, journey.  Aeneas' \softline
journey, like Dante's own, is to be dealt with as actually having occurred in space and time.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Difficult verses discussed by Mazzoni at length (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento \softline
alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 188-97.  The \softline
most troubling phrase is 'e 'l chi e 'l quale' (v. 18 -- see Mazzoni, pp. 192-96).  The sense, \softline
however, may be fairly straightforward: it is not surprising that God should have chosen Aeneas \softline
to found Rome, with its profound impact on human history, both imperial and ecclesiastical, since 
he was (the 'who' of the verse) both the founder of a royal line (ancestor of Julius Caesar through \softline
Ascanius -- see Buti, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.18) and 'divine' (the 'what,' since he was the son of a \softline
goddess, Venus).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 17.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A good example of what happens when words and concepts from antecedent literary \softline
traditions become 'theologized' by the context of this poem, in this case the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cortesia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of chivalric \softline
and amatory lyric.  The sort of 'courtesy' offered by the true Lord far outstrips anything that might \softline
be had from a human lord or a human lady.  For the tradition of the concept as it comes into \softline
Dante see Erminia Maria Dispenza Crimi, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 "Cortesia" e "Valore" dalla tradizione a Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(Rovito: Marra, 1993).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 20-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alma}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has had various interpretations in the commentary tradition, \softline
e.g., 'exalted' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 eccelsa}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Boccaccio), 'lofty' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Buti), 'nurturing' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alma}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Landino), 'holy' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sancta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : \softline
Benvenuto).  Citing Paget Toynbee, Mazzoni ( }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina \softline
Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967)]), p. 198, makes a strong \softline
argument for the last of these.  Our translation reflects his view.  And this formulation knits up \softline
these two tercets into a single meaning: Aeneas was chosen by God to be the founder of imperial \softline
and ecclesiastical Rome.  Such a view disturbs those who believe that Dante, when he began the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , was still a Guelph in his political attitudes.  But a reading of the fourth book of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(see Mazzoni, pp. 216-20), demonstrates the close correspondence between what Dante says here \softline
and what he said in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.iv-v and reveals that he had already made a decisive shift toward \softline
recognizing the importance of what we would call 'secular Rome.'  Dante, as the prophecy of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 veltro}{\plain \fs24 \f1  may already have demonstrated, now believes in the divine origin and mission of the \softline
Empire.  See note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.100-105.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" \softline
--Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 198-220, for a thorough review of this tercet, made \softline
problematic not because its words or the sense of these words is difficult, but because what it says \softline
is assumed by many commentators not to be Dantean in spirit.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 II.20-21.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), p. 237, argues for the \softline
view, advanced by S. Betti a century ago, that 'maggiore,' in early Italian, was a title of honor ('the \softline
great'), a positive form of the adjective, not its comparative form ('greater').  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di \softline
un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), \softline
pp. 220-22, supports this thesis, but also represents those who do argue for the comparative sense \softline
of the adjective here, believing that it refers to the fact that Peter, the first pope, was 'greater' than \softline
all his successors.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See note }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 II.28.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 26.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Aeneas understood things from what was revealed to him in the Elysian Fields, most \softline
notably by Anchises (see Mazzoni,  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967], p. 222).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This verse concludes the 'imperial theme' of this canto, initiated in v. 13.  These five 
tercets continually break Aeneas' identity or task into two aspects ('e 'l chi e 'l quale' [v. 18], 'de \softline
l'alma Roma e di suo impero' [v. 20], 'la quale e 'l quale' [v. 22], 'di sua vittoria e del papale \softline
ammanto' [v. 27].)  This speech is not in the mouth of Virgil, but of Dante, and for a reason.  It \softline
purveys, with some heated enthusiasm, the view of Roman imperial excellence that Dante had \softline
probably only recently developed.  He cannot allow its religious dimension utterance by Virgil, \softline
whose credentials as 'Christian' are not exactly imposing.  And so the not-very-mature protagonist \softline
is here given the author's voice to say what that author wants most definitely to set down before \softline
us.  And it is probably for this reason that the passage is as repetitive as it is.  There can be no \softline
mistaking what it says.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This flat statement that Paul's journey actually occurred contrasts with the less \softline
forthright claim made for Aeneas's in verse 12: 'Tu dici che' (You tell that).  This and the \softline
subsequent phrasing, in which that same journey is referred to as the 'andata onde li dai tu vanto' \softline
(journey for which you grant him glory) at v. 25, both imbue the speaker's acceptance of the \softline
veracity of Virgil's account of that journey with a certain sense of dubiety (see Hollander, "The \softline
'Canto of the Word' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Newberryana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Cherchi and A. C. \softline
Mastrobuono, vol. II [Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1990], p. 103), at least when \softline
compared with the biblical authority enjoyed by Paul's.  And see the previous remark of \softline
Grandgent (comm. to}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II, Introduction): 'It is worth noting that in introducing the example of \softline
Aeneas, Dante begins with "tu dici che... ," and a few lines further on he uses the phrase "questa \softline
andata onde gli dai tu vanto"; so in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . 15.26, referring to the same episode, he adds "se fede \softline
merta nostra maggior Musa" (if our greatest "Muse" is worthy our belief), meaning Virgil.  These \softline
expressions seem to imply a mental reservation with regard to the literal veracity of Aeneas's \softline
adventure.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab With regard to the question of whether or not Dante believed Paul had been to hell (as \softline
recounted in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Visio Pauli}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) see Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.28, with bibliography [to which now \softline
should be added Theodore Silverstein and Anthony Hilhorst, eds., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Apocalypse of Paul: A New \softline
Critical Edition of Three Long Latin Versions}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Geneva: Patrick Cramer, 1997]).  Most \softline
commentators would seem to believe that Dante is here alluding only to Paul's heavenly journey, \softline
not to his aprocryphal descent.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vas d'elez{\f3 \'56}one}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Chosen Vessel) see Acts 9:15.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 32.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It has frequently been remarked that this example of 'negative typology' must be taken \softline
ironically.  What the protagonist says is not what his author thinks: Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 is}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to be understood as \softline
both the 'new Aeneas' and the 'new Paul.'  Jacoff and Stephany offer an ample deliberation on this \softline
subject (Rachel Jacoff and William Stephany, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Americana: "Inferno" II}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989], pp. 57-72).  For a study of Paul's presence \softline
in Dante's works see Giuseppe Di Scipio, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Presence of Pauline Thought in the Works of \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Lewiston, N.Y.: The Edwin Mellen Press, 1995).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 33-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's apparent modesty is obviously meant to be taken rather as cowardice, as \softline
Virgil's response (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.45) makes pellucidly clear.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-40.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A type of simile Dante enjoys deploying, one in which tenor and vehicle are \softline
eventually seen to involve the same agent, or at least an anonymous other human and the 
protagonist: 'and as a man... so was I.'  This first 'negative' simile of the canto is balanced by its \softline
concluding 'positive' one: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.127-130.  For the strategically balanced compositional units of \softline
the first two cantos see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.1-6.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 41.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the importance of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 impresa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the overall economy of the poem see \softline
Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), p. \softline
230.  It occurs twice in this canto (next at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.47), where it refers to Dante's journey, then in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.7, where it refers to the poem that Dante is writing, and finally in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.95, \softline
where it surely refers to the voyage, and perhaps to the poem as well.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the first occurrence of the word 'word' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 parola}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in the poem and in this canto.  \softline
It will reappear four more times in the canto at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.43 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.67, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.111, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.135, and \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.137.  If, as several commentators have urged (see Hollander, "The 'Canto of the Word' \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Newberryana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Cherchi and A. C. Mastrobuono, vol. II \softline
[Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1990], p. 96), the first canto of the poem is the 'canto \softline
della paura' (canto of fear -- the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 paura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  appears five times [see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.15], as does \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 parola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in this one, and neither appears so many times in any other canto), then }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II perhaps \softline
should be construed as the 'canto della parola' (canto of the word).  See Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 passim}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  And \softline
see Rachel Jacoff and William Stephany, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Americana: "Inferno" II}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Philadelphia: \softline
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989), pp. 1-19, echoing this phrase in the title of the opening \softline
section of their essay.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a possible source for this verse, not hitherto cited, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.592-593, where \softline
Aeneas scornfully addresses Lucagus, whom he has just mortally wounded, and tells his fallen \softline
enemy that he cannot blame his plight on the shying of his horses: 'Lucage, nulla tuos currus fuga \softline
segnis equorum / prodidit aut vanae vertere ex hostibus umbrae' (Lucagus, the cowardly flight of \softline
your horses has not betrayed your chariot, nor has the empty shadow of an enemy turned them \softline
away).  See Hollander, "Le opere di Virgilio nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la "bella \softline
scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f3 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. A. A. Iannucci (Ravenna: Longo, 1993), p. 256.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 \ul0 \tab 52.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The verbal adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sospesi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (suspended), that is, in a position between the presence \softline
of God and actual punishment, is a technical term for those who dwell in Limbo.  See Mazzoni's \softline
note (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: \softline
Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 239-47.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 53-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's anonymous first appearance and Virgil's instinctive obeisance might \softline
easily lead a reader to assume an 'allegorical' valence for this lady.  For a recent study of the roots \softline
of the problematic allegorical interpretation of Beatrice see Bruno Porcelli, "Beatrice nei \softline
commenti danteschi del Landino e del Vellutello" [1994], in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuovi studi su Dante e Boccaccio \softline
con analisi della "Nencia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Pisa: Istituti editoriali e poligrafici internazionali, 1997), pp. 57-78.  \softline
We will in time be told who she is (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.70).  'Beatrice's descent gives Virgil motive and cause; \softline
without her intervention he would have known nothing (the damned, we learn at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.100-108, \softline
do not know the present state of things on earth), done nothing.  Virgil's actions are thus so \softline
circumscribed that we can hardly miss Dante's point.  It is Beatrice in Heaven, not Virgil in \softline
Limbo, who is first aware of Dante's plight (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.49-51).  And the burden of Virgil's words here 
is to give testimony to the power and glory of Beatrice, to whose charge he immediately consigns \softline
himself.  It is she, not he, who initiates the action of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , something we did not know a \softline
canto ago (for an appreciation of Virgil's limited understanding of Beatrice, see Singleton, "Virgil \softline
Recognizes Beatrice," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annual Report of the Dante Society}{\plain \fs24 \f1  74 [1956], pp. 32-33)' (cited from \softline
Hollander, "The 'Canto of the Word' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Newberryana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Cherchi \softline
and A. C. Mastrobuono, vol. II [Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1990], pp. 105-6).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 56-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil describes Beatrice's words as being }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 soave e piana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (gentle and clear).  She \softline
will, in turn, describe his speech as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 parola ornata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (polished words -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.67).  The two \softline
adjectives, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 piana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ornata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , may remind us of a major distinction, found in medieval \softline
categorizations of rhetorical styles, between the plain, or low, style, and the ornate, or high.  \softline
Benvenuto (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.56) was the first to point this out, glossing 'soave e piana' as follows: \softline
'divine speech is sweet and humble, not elevated and proud, as it that of Virgil and the poets.'  \softline
Thus Virgil's description of Beatrice's words corresponds antithetically to hers of his; her speech \softline
represents the sublimely humble style valorized by the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , while his recalls the high style that \softline
marked pagan eloquence (the observation is drawn from Hollander, "The 'Canto of the Word' \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Newberryana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Cherchi and A. C. Mastrobuono, vol. II \softline
[Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1990], p. 107, where there are references to previous \softline
discussions in Auerbach, "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sermo humilis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Literary Language and Its Public in Late Latin \softline
Antiquity and in the Middle Ages}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , tr. R. Manheim (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965 \softline
[1958]),  pp. 65-66; and to Giuseppe Mazzota, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Poet of the Desert}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1979), pp. 157-58).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For Boccaccio's notion that Beatrice's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 favella}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (speech) was in fact the Florentine \softline
vernacular see Padoan{\u8219\'27}s commentary to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.57.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's first words, which Daniello (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.58) compared to Juno's \softline
attempt to win over Aeolus at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.66-67, offer a striking example of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 captatio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  They will be \softline
effective enough in gaining Virgil's good will.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 59.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Pompeo Venturi (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.59) was perhaps the first to suggest the presence of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.609 behind Dante's line.  His view is now widely accepted.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is perhaps the most debated line of the canto.  Is the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mondo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (world) or \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 moto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (movement)?  In recent years the two 'sides' are represented by Pagliaro (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ulisse}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ricerche \softline
semantiche sulla "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Messina-Florence: D'Anna, 1967]), p. 737, arguing for \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 moto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Introduzione), pp. 166-67, (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La \softline
Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), p. 28, arguing for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mondo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  See the full review of \softline
the problem in Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" \softline
--Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]),  pp. 253-55, arguing convincingly for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mondo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  But now \softline
see Lanza (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Commed{\f3 \'58}a: nuovo testo critico secondo i pi{\f3 \'6a} antichi manoscritti fiorentini}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Anzio: \softline
De Rubeis, 1995]), p. 18, in support of Pagliaro's thesis, without, perhaps, taking Mazzoni's \softline
arguments sufficiently into account.  In his discussion of the verse, Mazzoni's main point is that \softline
the Virgilian passage that lies behind Dante's phrasing here is far more likely to be }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.607-609 (already cited only a line earlier at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.59 [see discussion in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.58-60]) than \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.173-175, previously translated by Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.iii.10.  The first of these 
passages would require us to understand }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mondo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as the most likely paraphrase; the second, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 moto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a consideration of the fullest implications of this verse, see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un \softline
nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), \softline
pp. 256-68.  According to him, the literal sense is that Dante is not a friend to Fortune, not that \softline
she has forsaken }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 him}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Mazzoni's position is developed from Casella's interpretation ("'L'amico \softline
mio e non della ventura,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  27 [1943], 117-34), which is itself based on a text in \softline
Abelard's commentary to St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans.  The upshot of these readings is that \softline
Beatrice makes Dante her friend in true spiritual friendship, denying that he is 'friendly' to Fortune.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 62-64.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Words familar from the first canto come back into play here: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 diserta piaggia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
I.29), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cammin}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.1), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 paura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.53), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 smarrito}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.3).  This is not the last time we will \softline
look back to the protagonist's desperate condition evident at the beginning of the poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67.  parola ornata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : See Hollander, "The 'Canto of the Word' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
Newberryana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Cherchi and A. C. Mastrobuono, vol. II (Evanston: Northwestern University \softline
Press, 1990), pp. 107, 118, for discussion of (1) Auerbach's measuring of Virgil's 'ornate speech' \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sermo humilis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Literary Language and Its Public in Late Latin Antiquity and in the Middle \softline
Ages}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , tr. R. Manheim [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965], pp. 65-66) against Beatrice's \softline
'plain' style (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.56) -- to the detriment of the former -- citing a telling passage in the \softline
commentary of Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.56) in service of that perception and (2) the \softline
undercutting of Virgil's 'ornate speech' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 parola ornata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) when it is seen as linked to Jason's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 parole \softline
ornate}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  XVIII.91), the deceptive rhetoric by which he seduces women, previously discussed \softline
by Mazzotta (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Poet of the Desert}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979]), pp. 157-58, as well as by Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, \softline
1983], p. 153, and "Dante's Pagan Past," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  5 }{\plain \fs24 \f1 [1985], pp. 30-31); see also \softline
Teodolinda Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine "Comedy": Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1992]), p. 77.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 74.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's promise to speak well of Virgil to God has drawn some skeptical response, \softline
e.g., Castelvetro: 'Questo che monta a Virgilio che {\f3 \'50} dannato?' (What good is this to Virgil, who \softline
is damned? -- comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.74).  We are probably meant to be more impressed than that.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The meaning of this difficult tercet would seem to be: 'O lady of virtuous \softline
disposition that alone, shared by others, may bring them, too, to salvation out of this sub-lunar \softline
world of sin....'  This is to rely on Mazzoni's affirmation (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla \softline
"Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967], pp. 276-77) of Barbi's \softline
reading of the verse (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934], p. 22).  Barbi's (and \softline
Mazzoni's) main objection to making }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the antecedent of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cui}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is that to do so 'depersonalizes' \softline
Beatrice, making her an 'allegory' of theology, as indeed most of the commentators who so \softline
construe the line do in fact interpret her.  Anna Maria Chiavacci Leonardi ("Questioni di \softline
punteggiatura in due celebri attacchi danteschi [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ., II 76-78 e X 67-69]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24 \f1  36 \softline
[1984], pp. 4-19, mounts a sustained counter-attack upon the Barbi/Mazzoni position, citing \softline
Boethius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Consolatio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.iii.3), who addresses the Lady Philosophy as 'omnium magistra virtutum' \softline
(mistress of every virtue), a passage first adduced by Pietro di Dante (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.76).  For 
her, as for Singleton ("Virgil Recognizes Beatrice," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annual Report of the Dante Society}{\plain \fs24 \f1  74 \softline
[1956]) before her, the reference of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cui}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , for Virgil that woman who knows all things, \softline
Philosophy.  Jacoff and Stephany (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Americana: "Inferno" II}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Philadelphia: \softline
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989]), pp. 42-48, support Singleton and Chiavacci Leonardi.  \softline
What complicates any attempt at interpreting this verse is the fact that it is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Virgil}{\plain \fs24 \f1  who is \softline
describing his meeting with Beatrice, a woman whom he does not know.  However, he perhaps \softline
knows enough to understand her extraordinary powers.  She has named herself at v. 70, \softline
announces (rather obliquely) that she inhabits heaven, and, that, when she returns there, she will \softline
praise him to God (vv. 71-74).  Virgil, having seen Christ harrow hell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.52-63), knows that \softline
this woman, unlike any others whom he knew when he was on earth, is part of that Christian \softline
dispensation which alone permits the ascent to heaven.  Thus he knows all that he needs to in \softline
order to understand that the virtues of this woman are such that all those who share them may be \softline
saved  -- it is in these alone that the human race 'exceeds' its circumstances.  To make Beatrice \softline
unique among humankind would imply that no one but she 'exceeds' the dross of the physical \softline
universe.  And that would go too far, even for Dante.  Our translation follows Petrocchi, who also \softline
accepts the Barbi/Mazzoni reading of the line's meaning.  We also agree with that reading, while \softline
admitting that a strong case for the other view has been made by those who do not do so.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Does the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  modify }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna}{\plain \fs24 \f1  or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 virt{\f3 \'6a}}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ?  Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Commedia secondo \softline
l{\u8219\'27}antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), p. 30, takes away the comma after the second noun, found in the 1921 \softline
edition, in order to make it clearer that the adjective modifies }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 virt{\f3 \'6a}}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For reasons to believe that \softline
this often contested view is the better one, see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla \softline
"Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 276-80.  But see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.76-78.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The present reading was defended against other variants by Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Problemi di critica \softline
dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), pp. 203, 261.  Barbi notes that this reading (1) is a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lectio \softline
difficilior}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , (2) reflects the phrasing found in Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.76-77) already cited by Dante in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (XXV.9), and (3) simply makes the most sense: 'there is no need for you to do more \softline
than make your wishes known to me, as you have done.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 83.  in questo centro}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Singleton (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.83) speaks of the 'strong pejorative \softline
connotation' of Dante's phrase, stemming from 'the well-established view that the earth's position \softline
at the center of the universe is the most ignoble -- because it is farthest from God and His angels.'  \softline
Singleton goes on the cite from a sermon of Fra Giordano da Rivalto, characterizing the true \softline
center of the earth as 'that point within the earth which is in its midst, as the core is in the midst of \softline
an apple.  We believe that hell is located there, at the true center.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's insistence that she is not 'touchable' by the grim powers of the pains of \softline
hell underlines the marginality of sin for the saved.  Hell is simply not of concern to them.  It is \softline
important to know, as one begins reading the poem, what one can only know once one has \softline
finished it: no soul in purgation or in grace in heaven has a thought for the damned (only the \softline
damned themselves do).  Their concern for those who do not share their redeeming penitence or \softline
bliss is reserved for those still alive on earth, who have at least the hope of salvation.  Hell, for the \softline
saved, is a sordid reality of which it is better not to speak.  A similar disregard for the damned 
(and even for our mortal hero, wrestling with his sins) is evidenced by the wryly laconic and \softline
unsympathetic angel who descends to help Virgil lead his charge into the City of Dis (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.91-103).  Those who admire various of Dante's sinners, despite their eternal damnation, would do \softline
well to keep both these scenes in mind.  See the strong statements to this effect found in \softline
Grandgent{\u8219\'27}s article "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quid Ploras}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  118 (2000 [1926]), pp. 85-94; Grandgent \softline
reminds his reader of the harsh question put by the angel to St. Paul, who has allowed himself to \softline
weep for the damned, in the apocryphal }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Visio Pauli}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  The angel wants to know why Paul is \softline
weeping ("Quid ploras?") for the damned when his attention should be turned to Christ.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   While every modern commentator recognizes (quite rightly) Mary in this lady, none of \softline
the early interpreters do, a fact that may seem astonishing (Castelvetro may have been the first to \softline
do so -- see his comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.94).  Castelvetro's recognition only gets incorporated into the \softline
commentary tradition by Tommaseo (see his comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.94).  See discussion in Jacoff and \softline
Stephany, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Americana: "Inferno" II}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania \softline
Press, 1989), pp. 26-29.  Those who argue for an allegorical reading of the three ladies in heaven \softline
(see note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.102) might do well to contemplate the fact that the first allegorical readings \softline
were developed by those who thought the nameless state of the first of them pointed in that \softline
direction.  Once we believe she is Mary, the door to an allegorical understanding, if not pressed \softline
shut, has surely begun to close.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Lucy, the martyred Syracusan virgin (4th century), obviously played a special role in \softline
Dante's devotional life.  (She will reappear in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.52-63, where she indeed carries Dante \softline
from the valley in which he sleeps in the Ante-Purgatory to the gate of Purgatory itself; and then \softline
she will be seen seated in blessedness at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.137-138.)  See the interesting discussion of \softline
Dante{\u8219\'27}s sense of her in Jacoff and Stephany (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Americana: "Inferno" II}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989]), pp. 29-38.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Rachel, the third of the ladies in heaven who share Beatrice's concerns for Dante's \softline
salvation, is traditionally interpreted (as she is by Dante himself -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.94-108) as \softline
the contemplative life, as her sister Leah represents the active one.  Since the fourteenth century \softline
there have been frequent (and widely varying) attempts to 'allegorize' the Virgin, Lucy, and \softline
Beatrice, most often as various varieties of grace (see Padoan{\u8219\'27}s comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.97 for a brief \softline
summary).  There is no textual basis for such efforts, as appealing as many readers apparently find \softline
them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   What exactly does it mean, Lucy's insistence to Beatrice that, for her sake, Dante \softline
'left the vulgar herd' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 la volgare schiera}{\plain \fs24 \f1 )?  Guido da Pisa (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.105) interprets the \softline
phrase to mean Dante turned in his studies from the liberal arts to theology.  Without debating \softline
such a judgment, one might add a poetic dimension to it, as has Francesco Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un \softline
nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]),  \softline
pp. 289-93.  According to him, the most important meaning of the verse is to reflect Dante's \softline
turning from a 'conventional' amorous poetic subject matter to what he will later call the 'dolce stil \softline
novo' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.57), a poetry that presents, in a new 'style,' the higher meaning of Beatrice.  \softline
(Some would go still farther and suggest that this meaning is essentially Christological -- see \softline
Hollander, "Dante's 'dolce stil novo' and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: mito e poesia. Atti del secondo 
Seminario dantesco internazionale, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 ed. M. Picone and T. Crivelli [Florence: Cesati, 1999], pp. \softline
263-81.)  Mazzoni's view is seconded by the importance of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 volgare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to Dante.  While it is \softline
surely at times limited to the negative sense of the Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vulgus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , pertaining to the common people, \softline
the 'mob,' it is also the word that he uses to describe his own vernacular speech, as in the title of \softline
his treatise }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari Eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ('On Eloquence in the Vernacular').  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The view that Dante's sense of his own poetic vocation is central to the meaning of this \softline
verse is supported by the text at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.101, where the group of classical poets, who so \softline
graciously include Dante in their number, is also described as a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 schiera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (company).  Such a \softline
formulation of poetic filiation and denial of same results in the following view: In the second \softline
canto Dante tells of having left behind rhymers in the vernacular who sing centrally or only of \softline
sexual love; in the fourth he relates that he was included in a group of the greatest poets of all \softline
time, who dealt with more 'serious' matters.  These are the only two times in the work that the \softline
word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 schiera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is used (or is possibly used, in the first case) for groups of poets.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Roberto Mercuri links this verse to Dante's earlier and similar disgust with the 'vulgar herd' \softline
expressed in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.i.8 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.i.10, where Dante, turning to the study of philosophy, \softline
describes those lesser men -- whom he now intends to aid by bringing them word of the \softline
philosophic truths that have been revealed to him -- as up to now partaking, not of his grand feast \softline
(a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or banquet), but of grass and acorns in their }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bestiale pastura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (bestial feeding), and \softline
goes on to describe himself precisely as having escaped from such }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastura del vulgo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (feeding of \softline
the common folk).  See Mercuri, "Il canto II dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  11 (1998), p. 19.  \softline
However, the whole enterprise of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is pretty clearly aimed at less than theological \softline
speculation and is addressed to a specifically non-Beatricean woman (the 'Lady Philosophy').  And \softline
thus one might, with better reason, see this verse as correcting that earlier account of Dante's \softline
'breaking away' from the wrong sort of intellectual and amorous life to a better version.  In this \softline
mode, one might notice that the project of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is described as an attempt to slake our \softline
'natural thirst' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 la naturale sete}{\plain \fs24 \f1  -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.i.9) for philosophic knowing.  The next time we hear \softline
this phrase (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.1-3) it is restored to its source in John's gospel (John 4:5-15): the truth \softline
that is found alone in Christ.  In such ways Dante corrects some of his earlier opinions and \softline
judgments when he chooses to encounter them again in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 107-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As tormented a passage as may be found in this canto, and one of the most \softline
difficult in the entire work, whether for its literal sense (what 'death'? what 'river'? what 'sea'?) or \softline
its possibly only metaphorical meaning.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.108 and, once again, Mazzoni's \softline
summary of the centuries-long debate over the two verses (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla \softline
"Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 294-303, as well as \softline
Freccero's essay, "The River of Death: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II, 108" (1966), in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Poetics of Conversion,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. \softline
Rachel Jacoff (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986), pp. 55-69.  For discussion of a \softline
'typological' reading of the passage see Hollander, "The 'Canto of the Word' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura \softline
Dantis Newberryana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Cherchi and A. C. Mastrobuono, vol. II (Evanston: Northwestern \softline
University Press, 1990), pp. 110-11: 'While it may seem that the very locution of the phrase tends \softline
to support those who find only a metaphorical sense operative here..., we should perhaps entertain \softline
the possibility suggested by a more historical reading -- namely, that this river is Dante's "Jordan."  \softline
If the actions of the first two cantos may be understood as being linked to successive stages in the \softline
progress of salvation history, have we come... to Jordan?  Filippo Villani, in his commentary to \softline
this verse, was the first to propose as much: '}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 su la rivera,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  scilicet Iordanis fluminis qui ponitur pro 
sacramento baptismatis' (ed. Bellomo, p. 109).  And we might want to consider some of the later \softline
reasons for this interpretation offered by A. Belloni (cited by Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo \softline
commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), p. 297), \softline
for whom the Jordan is not the tributary of a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  but of the Dead Sea, a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lacus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For a discussion \softline
of Isidore of Seville's distinction between the two terms in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etymologiae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13.19, see Hollander, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s "Commedia," }{\plain \fs24 \f1 pp. 262-63, also adverting to Freccero's arguments (in "The \softline
River of Death") for Jordan, which develop an earlier interpretation of the verse by Singleton \softline
("'Sulla fiumana ove 'l mar non ha vanto,' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , II, 108]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Romanic Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  39 [1948], pp. \softline
269-77).  Were this admittedly venturesome reading to find favor, Virgil would then come as John \softline
the Baptist, a view of his role in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that I support.  (Partial recognitions perhaps begin \softline
with Carroll [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.61-66].  See also P{\f2\u233\'e9}zard, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante sous la pluie de feu}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Paris: Vrin, \softline
1950], p. 343.  Porcelli ["'Chi per lungo silenzio parea fioco' e il valore della parola nella \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ausonia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  19 (1964), pp. 34-36] moved the argument forward considerably.  My own \softline
attempts to establish this vital connection may be found in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s "Commedia,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  pp. \softline
261-63; in "The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, \softline
1980], pp. 86-87, 193; and in "Le opere di Virgilio nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la \softline
"bella scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f3 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. A. A. Iannucci [Ravenna: Longo, 1993], \softline
pp. 69-77.)'  \ul0 \tab For the literal sense in which Jordan is not a 'sea,' and thus the 'lake' that receives \softline
the waters of Jordan see Filippo Villani again (ed. Bellomo, p. 109): {\u8219\'27}Et, ad licteram, Iordanis \softline
fluvius mare non ingreditur, sed desinit in lacum nitidum et etiam amenum{\u8219\'27} (And, in the literal \softline
sense, the river Jordan does not flow into a sea, but ends in a lake that is bright and clear, even \softline
pleasant).  Jacoff and Stephany also argue for the presence of Jordan in the 'typological' design of \softline
the canto's action (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Americana: "Inferno" II}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Philadelphia: University of \softline
Pennsylvania Press, 1989], pp. 48-56).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This is to emphasize a possible reading at the expense of many others (for which see \softline
bibliography in the various studies mentioned, above).  None of them has received anything like \softline
common assent, either.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This much-contested line is discussed by Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Commedia secondo l'antica \softline
vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), pp. 33-34, arguing strongly for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ove}{\plain \fs24 \f1  rather than }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 onde}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  However, it should be \softline
noted that Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti \softline
I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 294-96, makes a good case for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 onde}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  But any solution of the \softline
literal sense, which is totally opaque, depends on one's eventual resolution of what the line finally \softline
means.  And there hardly exists a common view of a solution (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.107-108).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice concludes her speech by expressing the efficacy of Lucy's words on \softline
Dante's behalf, which won her over to interceding with Virgil in order to give her beloved a \softline
second chance.  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX and XXXI will reveal that she had grounds for being less \softline
charitable to her backsliding lover.)  Her speech concludes with the same sort of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 captatio \softline
benevolentiae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that marked its inception (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.58 and the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.58), now couched in \softline
terms that praise Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 parlare onesto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  The phrase means more than 'honest speech,' as is made \softline
clear by its etymological propinquity to the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 onora}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (honors) in the next line.  'Noble' (found \softline
also in Sinclair's translation) seemed to the translators a reasonable way to attempt to bridge the \softline
gap between 'honest' and 'decorous,' retaining a sense of moral and stylistic gravity for the words \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 of the greatest poet of pagan antiquity -- which Virgil was for Dante.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Federico Sanguineti{\u8219\'27}s edition }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 (Dantis Alagherii Comedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Edizioni del \softline
Galluzzo, 2001]), p. 14, here emends the text to read 'tratte' (rather than 'fatte')  His arguments \softline
for this adjustment in the text, enunciated at the Second International Dante Seminar at Ascona in \softline
1997, seem convincing.  The words would then be rather 'drawn forth' than 'made,' a precision \softline
that has little impact on the general meaning of the passage.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 116.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's tears may remind a reader of Venus's when the goddess weeps for her \softline
burdened son in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.228, as was perhaps first suggested by Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s \softline
"Commedia," }{\plain \fs24 \f1 pp. 91-92.  See also Jacoff, "The Tears of Beatrice," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  100 (1982), p. \softline
3, showing that the verse probably reflects Rachel's tears for her lost children (Jeremiah 31:15) -- \softline
who are eventually restored to her (as will Dante be to Beatrice).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil offers a summation, as might a present-day lawyer concluding his charge \softline
to a jury or a classical or medieval orator attempting to convince his learned auditors as he \softline
concludes his argument.  Virgil has saved Dante from the she-wolf; why has his pupil not been \softline
more ready to follow him?  And now there is the further evidence of the three heavenly ladies who \softline
have also interceded on Dante's behalf, thus giving confirmation of the justness of what Virgil had \softline
sketched as a plan for Dante's journey (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.112-123).  The wavering so amply displayed by the \softline
protagonist in this canto once reminded J. Arthur Hanson, a fine Virgilian who taught at Princeton \softline
for many years until his untimely death, precisely of Virgil's similarly wavering hero.  But the time \softline
for wavering is now, finally, at an end.  The following simile will give Dante's new determination \softline
expression.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This second simile of the canto (the first occurred at vv. 37-40) reveals how \softline
carefully Dante has been using classical similes to structure his two proemial cantos, both in \softline
themselves, and as a unit.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.1-6.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a close analysis of this passage see Luisa Ferretti Cuomo, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Anatomia di un'immagine \softline
("Inferno" 2.127-132): saggio di lessicologia e di semantica strutturale}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (New York: Peter Lang, \softline
1994), who treats the simile as a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mise en ab{\f2\u238\'ee}me}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the entire work.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the resonance of III Kings 17:22-24, especially the phrase 'the word of the \softline
Lord in your mouth is truth,' see Luisa Ferretti Cuomo, "La polisemia delle similitudini nella \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Eliseo: un caso esemplare," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Strumenti critici}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 n.s. (1995), p. 114.  And for \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vere parole}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Beatrice, see also the 'veras... voces' that Aeneas would like to exchange with \softline
mother Venus, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.409, as noted by Jacoff and Stephany, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Americana: \softline
"Inferno" II}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989), pp. 21-22.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 140.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the words }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 duca}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 segnore}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 maestro}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as well as others, terms used by Dante \softline
for his guide, see Hermann Gmelin, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Kommentar: die H{\f2\u246\'f6}lle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Stuttgart: Klett, 1966), pp. 59-60, \softline
offering the following accountancy of these: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 duca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is used 19 times in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and 17 times in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 maestro}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 34 times in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 17 in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 signore}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 8 times; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 poeta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 8 times in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 7 times in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 savio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 6 times; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 padre}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 10 times.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Knitting together the two proemial cantos, the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cammino}{\plain \fs24 \f1  occupies their first \softline
and final verses.}}