{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}
{\f3\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\s1 \qj _26;}
{\s2 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _25;}
{\s3 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _24;}
{\s4 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _23;}
{\s5 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _22;}
{\s6 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _21;}
{\s7 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _20;}
{\s8 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _19;}
{\s9 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _18;}
{\s10 \qj\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _17;}
{\s11 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _16;}
{\s12 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _15;}
{\s13 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _14;}
{\s14 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _13;}
{\s15 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _12;}
{\s16 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _11;}
{\s17 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _10;}
{\s18 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _9;}
{\s19 \qj\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _8;}
{\s20 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _7;}
{\s21 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _6;}
{\s22 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _5;}
{\s23 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _4;}
{\s24 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _3;}
{\s25 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _2;}
{\s26 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _1;}
{\s27 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz914\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 04}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-6.}{\plain \fs24   The last canto had come to its dramatic conclusion with a shaking of the earth \softline
accompanied -- indeed perhaps caused by -- a supernatural lightning bolt that made Dante fall \softline
into a fainting 'sleep.'  (See, for example, Siro A. Chimenz [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.134], indicating the \softline
medieval belief that earthquakes were caused by winds imprisoned in the earth.  And see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.130-34.)  Now he is awakened by the following thunder.  It is important to \softline
remember that this is supernatural 'weather,' and serves to mirror Dante's internal condition.  \softline
While it may be positive that he has 'died' to the world of the senses (the view of Pascoli, Valli, \softline
and Pietrobono [see Francesco Mazzoni, "Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : \softline
il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 (1965), p. 49]), it is negative that he has done so \softline
out of fear.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab As the last verse of }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III (136) has him overcome by sleep ('sonno'); so in the first line \softline
of this following canto that sleep is broken, thus overriding the sharp line of demarcation that a \softline
canto ending or beginning seems to imply, as at the boundary between }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  II and }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  III.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 7.}{\plain \fs24   Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.7) says that }{\plain \fs24 \i proda}{\plain \fs24  does not here mean what it \softline
usually means, 'prow,' but, reflecting the Florentine vernacular, 'edge.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 9.}{\plain \fs24   There has been a centuries-long debate over the question of whether }{\plain \fs24 \i this}{\plain \fs24  'thunder' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i truono}{\plain \fs24 ), the noise made by the sorrowing damned, is the same as the thunderclap of verse 2 \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i truono}{\plain \fs24  [the reading in most MSS and editions]).  Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 45-49, summarizes \softline
that debate.  It seems best to understand that }{\plain \fs24 \i this}{\plain \fs24  noise is not the one that awakens Dante, but the \softline
one that he first hears from the inhabitants of Limbo, i.e., that the two identical words indicate \softline
diverse phenomena.  Mazzoni's position is strengthened by Petrocchi's choice of a reading found \softline
in only three MSS: }{\plain \fs24 \i introno}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata, Inferno}{\plain \fs24 , pp. 57-58), on the \softline
ground that Dante would not have used the same words so near to one another to indicate \softline
different things.  Padoan (comm. to  }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.9) translates the word as 'clamore assordante' \softline
(deafening clamor) and argues for this resolution of the problem, defending Petrocchi's reading, \softline
which was published two years after Mazzoni's commentary.  The word }{\plain \fs24 \i introno}{\plain \fs24 , as Petrocchi \softline
points out, appears twice again in this }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VI.32; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVII.71).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 13.}{\plain \fs24   That, even according to Virgil, who dwells in it, the world of Limbo is 'blind' might \softline
have helped hold in check some of the more enthusiastic readings of this canto as exemplary of \softline
Dante's 'humanistic' inclinations.  For important discussions along these lines see Mazzoni \softline
("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 29-35; Padoan ("Dante di fronte all'umanesimo letterario," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lettere \softline
Italiane}{\plain \fs24  17 [1965], pp. 237-57).  And see Virgil's own later 'gloss' to Limbo (in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . VII.25-30), \softline
where he describes his punishment for not believing in Christ-to-come as consisting in his being \softline
denied the sight of the Sun (God) that Sordello longs to (and will) see.  Dante describes Limbo \softline
as being without other punishment than its darkness (and indeed here it is described as a 'blind \softline
world' [}{\plain \fs24 \i cieco mondo}{\plain \fs24 ]), its inhabitants as sighing rather than crying out in pain (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.26).  Had \softline
he wanted to make Limbo as positive a place as some of his commentators do, he surely would \softline
have avoided, in this verse, the reference to the }{\plain \fs24 \i descent}{\plain \fs24  that is necessary to reach it.  Such was \softline
not the case for the neutrals in the previous circle, who apparently dwell at approximately the 
same level as the floor of the entrance through the gate of hell.  This is the first downward \softline
movement within the Inferno.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b \tab 16-17.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's sudden pallor (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.14) causes Dante to believe that his guide is fearful, \softline
as he himself had been at the end of the previous canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.131).  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b \tab 18.}{\plain \fs24   As Singleton points out (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.18), Virgil has given comfort to Dante \softline
when the latter has succumbed to doubt in each of the first two cantos.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-21.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil makes plain the reason for his pallor: he is feeling pity for those who dwell \softline
in Limbo (and thus himself as well), not fear.  That much seems plain enough.  But there has \softline
been a huge controversy over the centuries as to whether Virgil refers only to the inhabitants of \softline
Limbo or to }{\plain \fs24 \i all}{\plain \fs24  the damned.  Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il \softline
Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 58-65, offers a careful review of the \softline
problem and concludes that the better reading is the former, demonstrating (Mazzoni [p. 64] is \softline
opposing those who read the noun }{\plain \fs24 \i angoscia}{\plain \fs24  as being too strongly negative to describe the \softline
feelings of the denizens of Limbo) that Dante has, in five passages in earlier works, made sighs \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i sospiri}{\plain \fs24 ) the result of feeling anguish (}{\plain \fs24 \i angoscia}{\plain \fs24 ) -- as they are here (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.26).  This is a good \softline
example of a }{\plain \fs24 \i crux interpretum}{\plain \fs24  that is the creation of commentators; the meaning of the text is \softline
clear enough.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 25-27.}{\plain \fs24   As was true in the last circle (where the Neutrals were punished) the darkness is \softline
at first so great that Dante apparently cannot see; his first impressions are only auditory.  \softline
Compare }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  III.21-30.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 29.}{\plain \fs24   Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata, Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ), pp. 60-61, has emended \softline
the 1921 text (}{\plain \fs24 \i molto grandi}{\plain \fs24 ) for this less colloquial and more precise adjectival form (}{\plain \fs24 \i molte e \softline
grandi}{\plain \fs24 ).  Where, in 1481, Landino had argued (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.29) that 'many' is an odd word \softline
for Dante to have used to signify 'three' (groups of men, women, and children), Petrocchi \softline
responds that Dante does not necessarily so limit the number of groups, i.e., there may be many \softline
groups of each of these classes of beings.  Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina \softline
Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), p. 68, cites Guiniforto delli \softline
Bargigi (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.29) and Sapegno (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.29) to exactly this effect -- in \softline
Sapegno's words, they are 'distinte in molte schiere, e ognuna di queste comprendente molte \softline
anime' (divided into many groups, each containing many souls).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 30.}{\plain \fs24   This line, seemingly 'innocent' of polemical intent, is in fact in pronounced and \softline
deliberate disagreement with St. Thomas (though in accord with Virgil's description of the \softline
crowds along the bank of Acheron [}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . VI.306-307]).  For Thomas, the inhabitants of Limbo \softline
were in one of two classes: the Hebrew saints, harrowed by Christ and taken to heaven, and all \softline
unbaptized infants.  They are now of that second group alone.  Dante's addition of the virtuous \softline
pagans is put forward on his own authority.  This is perhaps the first of many instances in which \softline
Dante chooses to differ with Thomas.  For a helpful analysis of the ways in which Dante both \softline
follows and separates himself from 'authoritative' accounts of the Limbus, see Mazzoni ("Saggio \softline
di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 \softline
[1965]), pp. 70-80.  Mazzoni shows that Dante is in total agreement with Thomas about the 
presence of the unbaptized infants in Limbo, but disagrees with him (following Bonaventure \softline
instead) about whether these infants suffer the pain that comes from knowing of their inability to \softline
see God -- which Thomas allows himself to doubt.  Dante (as does Bonaventure) holds a harsher \softline
view on this point.  His view of the unbaptized pagans, however, is as mild as his view of the \softline
pain of the infants is severe.  It is in sharp disagreement with the views of most Christians on this \softline
issue.  Padoan ("Il Limbo dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24  21 [1969]), p. 371, cites Guido da Pisa \softline
(comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.30) as exemplary of early puzzled or hostile responses to Dante's inclusion of \softline
the virtuous pagans in Limbo: 'Sed nostra fides non tenet quod ibi non sint nisi parvuli \softline
innocentes.  Iste autem poeta in hac parte et in quibusdam aliis loquitur non theologice sed \softline
poetice' (Our Christian faith, however, does not hold that there are any here other than the \softline
innocent babes.  Here, and in certain other passages, this poet speaks not as a theologian but as a \softline
poet).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The Latinism }{\plain \fs24 \i viri}{\plain \fs24  (for }{\plain \fs24 \i uomini}{\plain \fs24 , 'men') was probably forced by rhyme.  But, since all these \softline
are pagans, the Latinism works well as a way of underlining their pagan nature.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 34.}{\plain \fs24   Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV \softline
dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]) 'translates' }{\plain \fs24 \i s'elli hanno mercedi}{\plain \fs24  as follows: 'se hanno \softline
meritato con le buone opere' (if they are worthy because of their good deeds -- p. 81).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 36.}{\plain \fs24   The reading }{\plain \fs24 \i porta}{\plain \fs24 , not found in any early MS but one (where it is an emendation), \softline
has been supplied by modern editors, beginning in 1595 (Accademia della Crusca), and then \softline
eventually by Vandelli (edition of 1921).  See Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 , \softline
Introduzione), pp. 170-71.  Michele Barbi cited Fra Giordano da Pisa, }{\plain \fs24 \i Prediche inedite}{\plain \fs24 , ed. \softline
Nannucci, p. 149: 'Questa circoncisione si era porta della legge vecchia, siccome {\f2 \'50} oggi il \softline
battesimo nella nuova' (Just as circumcision was the gateway to the old law, so today is baptism \softline
in the new -- Barbi, }{\plain \fs24 \i Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934, p. 204]), and \softline
Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 82-84, adds other potential sources; he also points out that }{\plain \fs24 \i porta}{\plain \fs24  and \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i parte}{\plain \fs24  are words that scribes might easily have confused.  While it may be venturesome to oppose \softline
the manuscript tradition in this way, it is clear that some very distinguished }{\plain \fs24 \i dantisti}{\plain \fs24  have chosen \softline
to do so because of the utterly prosaic nature of the alternative.  To say that baptism is 'part of \softline
the faith that you profess' is to approach the condition of banal prose in a poem, as well as to \softline
move baptism, the key issue here in defining the reason for the damnation of unbaptized infants, \softline
back from its centrality.  For these and perhaps still other reasons the metaphoric }{\plain \fs24 \i porta}{\plain \fs24  does \softline
indeed seem the better reading.  Sabina Marinetti ("Note di lettura su }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  IV, v. 36," }{\plain \fs24 \i Critica \softline
del testo}{\plain \fs24  3 [2000], pp. 781-802), opposing Petrocchi in her helpful review of the debate, opts for \softline
'parte,' but with 'parte' being a verb and as having the sense that baptism separates believers from \softline
those who have not faith ('che parte dalla fede che tu credi').  For a rejoinder, arguing that Jacopo \softline
Alighieri's comment to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  III.82-84 seems clearly to point to 'porta,' see Giorgio Inglese and \softline
Sabina Marinetti, "Corrispondenza dantesca," }{\plain \fs24 \i Critica del testo}{\plain \fs24  4 (2001), pp. 481-85.  (Marinetti \softline
disagrees with Inglese's finding.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 42.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's insistence that the inhabitants of Limbo 'without hope live in longing' does \softline
not as greatly reduce the sense of punishment suffered here as some proclaim.  See St. Thomas, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i De malo}{\plain \fs24 , q. 5, art. 2 (cited by Mazzoni ["Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : \softline
il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 (1965)], p. 69): 'Peccato originali non debetur 
poena sensus, sed solum poena damni, scilicet carentia visionis Divinae' (original sin is not fitly \softline
punished by sensation, but only by damnation itself, that is, the absence of the sight of God).  If \softline
their only punishment is that absence, it is nonetheless total.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 44.}{\plain \fs24   In at least one respect }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  I and II are cantos paired in opposition, the first rooted \softline
in Dante's fear (}{\plain \fs24 \i paura}{\plain \fs24 ), the second in the reassurance granted by the word (}{\plain \fs24 \i parola}{\plain \fs24 ), as spoken by \softline
Virgil and Beatrice (and each of these key terms is used five times in its canto -- see Hollander \softline
("The 'Canto of the Word' [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  2]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis Newberryana}{\plain \fs24 , ed. P. Cherchi and A. C. \softline
Mastrobuono, vol. II [Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1990], pp. 96-97.  The same \softline
may be said for cantos III and IV.  Mazzoni, following the lead of Fiorenzo Forti ("Il limbo \softline
dantesco e i megalopsichoi dell'Etica nicomachea," }{\plain \fs24 \i Giornale storico della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24  \softline
138 [1961], pp. 329-64), identifies the central subject of the first of this pair as 'pusillanimit{\f2 \'42}' \softline
(cowardice), of the second as 'magnanimit{\f2 \'42}' (greatness of soul -- "Saggio di un nuovo commento \softline
alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965], pp. 34-35).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 45.}{\plain \fs24   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i sospesi}{\plain \fs24  ('suspended') has caused great dispute.  Are the }{\plain \fs24 \i limbicoli}{\plain \fs24  'hanging' \softline
between heaven and hell? between salvation and damnation?  Is there some potential better state \softline
awaiting them?  Mazzoni's note ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto \softline
IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 89-93, leaves little doubt, and resolves their \softline
situation as follows: they are punished eternally for their original sin, but are aware (as are none \softline
of the other damned souls) of the better life that is denied them.  They are 'suspended,' in other \softline
words, between their punishment and their impossible desires.  See, in agreement, Pertile ("Il \softline
nobile castello, il paradiso terrestre e l'umanesimo dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i Filologia e critica}{\plain \fs24  5 [1980]), p. 18.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-51.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's question has caused large discomfort.  Why should he seek confirmation \softline
of Christ's ascent to heaven from a pagan?  Why should he need to confirm his Christian faith on \softline
this indisputable point of credence, without which there is no Christian faith?  But neither \softline
Dante's question nor Virgil's answer concerns itself primarily with Christ's descent to Limbo and \softline
ascent to heaven, but rather with the more nebulous facts regarding those who went up }{\plain \fs24 \i with Him}{\plain \fs24  \softline
after the harrowing of hell.  See, for example, Jacopo Alighieri (comm. to  }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.48) or \softline
Guiniforto delli Bargigi (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.48) for similar views.  And see, for a modern recovery \softline
of the importance of the harrowing as a concern in Limbo, the work of Amilcare Iannucci \softline
("Limbo: the Emptiness of Time," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  52 [1979-80], pp. 69-128; "The Gospel of \softline
Nicodemus in Medieval Italian Literature," }{\plain \fs24 \i Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24  14 [1992], pp. 191-220).  \softline
'Did ever anyone, either by his own or by another's merit, go forth from here and rise to \softline
blessedness?'  Dante's question cannot possibly refer to Christ.  But it does refer, first, to the \softline
Hebrew patriarchs and matriarchs, second, to unbaptized infants and at least possibly to such as \softline
Trajan (allowed to escape Limbo by Pope Gregory's 'merit' and prayer to God on Trajan's behalf) \softline
as well as to all those who were later taken up from Limbo and whose ascent Virgil might have \softline
witnessed.  (Siro A. Chimenz thinks that Dante's second formulation refers to stories of \softline
'salvation by intervention,' including that of Trajan -- see his comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.49.)  Indeed, \softline
Virgil's answer will identify more than twenty of those harrowed by Christ; thus we know how \softline
he understood Dante's first concern.  (Dante's question begins with the verb and enclitic }{\plain \fs24 \i uscicci}{\plain \fs24  \softline
[go forth from here]; Virgil's answer begins with the verb and enclitic }{\plain \fs24 \i trasseci}{\plain \fs24  [drew forth from \softline
here]; this parallel construction nails home the subject: those first sent to Limbo and then \softline
harrowed.)  Dante was interested in learning, or in confirming what he had heard, about the 
harrowing.  But his question does have a second point.  Virgil has himself been elevated from \softline
hell, if but for a moment.  Dante's question alludes, tacitly, to him as well: 'Are you one of the \softline
saved?'  Dante's 'covert speech,' as the phrase intimates, is focused on the salvation of pagans.  \softline
Boccaccio suggests (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.46) that Dante is offering to help Virgil escape from \softline
Limbo, if this is possible.  While the reading seems forced, it does have the merit of centering \softline
attention on the interplay between Dante and Virgil involving the question of the salvation of \softline
pagans.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 51.}{\plain \fs24   In his gloss to this verse, Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.51) characterizes \softline
Dante's view of his own 'covert speech' as follows: ...'tacite dixeram: vos magni philosophi et \softline
poetae, quid profecit vobis ad salutem vestra sapientia magna sine fede?  Certe nihil: quia antiqui \softline
patres qui simpliciter et fideliter crediderunt, extracti sunt de carcere isto, ubi vos estis perpetuo \softline
permansuri' ( ...as though my words had hidden the thought, 'you great philosophers and poets, \softline
your great wisdom, what did it, without faith, accomplish for your salvation?  Certainly nothing \softline
at all, for even the ancient patriarchs, in their simple, faithful credence, were drawn up out of this \softline
prison, in which place you are to remain for ever and ever').\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 52-54.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil tells Dante what he witnessed in 34 A.D., when he was 'new' to his \softline
condition, some fifty-three years after his death in 19 B.C.  He saw a 'mighty one' (Christ \softline
recognized by Virgil only for his power, an anonymous harrower to the pagan observer).  He is \softline
either crowned with the sign of victory or crowned and holding the sign of victory, a sceptre \softline
representing the Cross.  Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il \softline
Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 105-12, patiently reviews the many \softline
differing responses to this verse and gives strong support to the latter view, thus necessitating the \softline
addition of a comma to the verse: 'con segno di vittoria, coronato.'  He is willing to have Christ \softline
crowned with the cruciform nimbus, as some would like, or simply by an aureole, but insists on \softline
the insignia of the Cross as being carried in Christ's hand.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 55-61.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's list of the patriarchs and matriarchs, beginning with 'our first parent,' \softline
Adam (Eve, similarly harrowed, will only be seen in the Empyrean [}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XXXII.5]), Abel, \softline
Noah, Moses, Abraham, David, Jacob, Isaac, the (twelve) sons of Jacob (and his daughter, \softline
Dinah? [but it seems unlikely that Dante was considering her]), and Rachel.  The twenty-one (or \softline
twenty-two -- if Dante counted Jacob's progeny as we do) Hebrew elders will be added to in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24  XXXII (vv. 4-12): Eve, Sarah, Rebecca, Judith, and Ruth, thus accounting for some of \softline
the 'many others' whom Virgil does not name here, twenty-five men and seven women in all, \softline
when we include the others added along the way: Samuel (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . IV.29), Rahab (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . IX.116), \softline
Solomon (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . X.109), Joshua (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XVIII.38), Judas Maccabeus (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XVIII.49), and Ezechiel \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XX.49).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 57.}{\plain \fs24   A nineteenth-century textual tradition, unsupported by manuscript evidence, tried to \softline
give Moses' adjective, }{\plain \fs24 \i ubidente}{\plain \fs24 , to Abraham in the next verse by punctuating the line differently.  \softline
It has no current champions.  See Barbi's comment (}{\plain \fs24 \i Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: \softline
Sansoni, 1934], p. 204).  The paradox revealed in Dante's view of Moses -- that a person of \softline
extraordinary powers should also be governed by still higher authority -- is not the result of a \softline
trivial distinction, especially when the reader later encounters powerful rulers who were far from \softline
obedient to such authority.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 62-63.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's conclusion effectively voids the second part of Dante's question.  He has \softline
told only of those who were taken by Christ for their own merits.  We may later reflect that he \softline
was able to witness the harrowing of Ripheus (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XX.68) and Cato (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . I.31) in this first \softline
group, before whom no one else was saved.  But what of }{\plain \fs24 \i later}{\plain \fs24  harrowings that Virgil might have \softline
witnessed?  The only one of which we eventually hear is that of Trajan (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XX.44).  Whatever \softline
the implication, Virgil is silent about the second category in Dante's question.  And we must be \softline
intrigued by Dante's having asked it in the first place.  The main reason for its inclusion is to \softline
raise the issue of Virgil's salvation, which is eventually countered by that of other pagans, \softline
perhaps most notably Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXI.91), seen by Dante as having become a Christian while \softline
he was alive, and thus spared a visit to Limbo on his way to Purgatory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 64-66.}{\plain \fs24   This transitional tercet, moving the reader from the overview of the canto's  \softline
inhabitants to a tighter focus on the greatest classical poets, is worthy of closer attention than it \softline
generally receives, for it shows us two techniques in Dante's impressive supply of literary \softline
devices.  First, the two poets are described as speaking as they walk: it is difficult to find such \softline
mimetic details in many medieval poems before Dante.  We do not need to know this; the \softline
information is here mainly, perhaps only, to establish the 'realism' of the scene.  Second, having \softline
asked us to believe in the literalness of what is being described, Dante immediately turns to \softline
metaphor; that is, now we are asked }{\plain \fs24 \i not}{\plain \fs24  to read literally.  If the verses had omitted the three \softline
words 'la selva, dico,' we probably would have understood the 'wood of thronging spirits' as a \softline
metaphor.  Dante does not }{\plain \fs24 \i need}{\plain \fs24  to insist so urgently on the metaphoric nature of his speech, he \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i wants}{\plain \fs24  to, welcoming the opportunity to remind us that he is in charge of the way this narrative is \softline
unfolded.  As usual, the narrative is presented as given (and not invented); however, the \softline
language that describes it is as 'invented' as language can be.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 68.}{\plain \fs24   The reading }{\plain \fs24 \i sonno}{\plain \fs24  (here 'sleep') has been much debated over the centuries.  For a \softline
summarizing description of that debate see Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina \softline
Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 119-20.  Most modern \softline
editors accept }{\plain \fs24 \i sonno}{\plain \fs24 , and take the resulting expression to be a case of poetic compression: 'not \softline
far from sleep' = 'not far from the place where I had slept.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 72.}{\plain \fs24   This new place, the only place in hell in which light is said to overcome darkness \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.68-69), is immediately linked to the 'key word' of this section of the canto, 'honor.'  This \softline
is the densest repetition of a single word and its derivates in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24 : seven times in 29 lines \softline
(72-100: at vv. 72, 73, 74, 76, 80, 93, 100), with a 'coda' tacked on at v. 133.  Can there be any \softline
doubt that honor and poetry are indissolubly linked in Dante's view of his own status?  As lofty \softline
as noble actions and great philosophy may be for him (but that part of the canto, vv. 106-147, \softline
has only a single occurrence of the word 'honor'), it is poetry that, for Dante, is the great calling.  \softline
See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.78.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 73.}{\plain \fs24   Padoan's gloss (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.73) on Dante's phrase is worth noting: }{\plain \fs24 \i sc{\f2 \'56}enz{\f2 \'56}a}{\plain \fs24  \softline
('knowledge') is represented by philosophy and the seven liberal arts, while }{\plain \fs24 \i arte}{\plain \fs24  ('art' in a more \softline
restricted sense than is found in the modern term) has to do with the means of expressing \softline
knowledge.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 78.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's enthusiasm for the power of great poetry is such that he claims that God, in 
recognition of its greatness, mitigates the punishment of these citizens of Limbo with respect to \softline
that of the others there who dwell in darkness (and who were not, we thus conclude, great poets -- or doers of great deeds or accomplishers of philosophic wisdom, for these, too, dwell in this \softline
lightest part of hell [vv. 106-147]).  As Singleton says (comm. to  }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.74), 'Dante is venturing \softline
beyond established doctrine' in such an assertion.  Dante may indeed be a theological poet, but \softline
he is sometimes -- and this is clearly one of those times -- a poet's poet.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 79.}{\plain \fs24   Of course there has been debate over the speaker of the following two lines.  Since \softline
Dante does not say, specifically, that Homer speaks them, we cannot know that it was he who \softline
spoke.  Dante steps back and lets us make the ascription.  Who else would have spoken?  \softline
Horace?  Perhaps.  Certainly not Ovid, not exactly Virgil's greatest supporter.  And even less \softline
Lucan, whose work rather pointedly attacks what Virgil champions.  But the scene makes its \softline
inner logic clear: the leader of the group is Homer, who 'comes as lord before the three' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
IV.87).  He speaks first, and Virgil responds.  They share the greatest poetic honor, even in \softline
Dante's Homerless experience of literary history.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 80-81.}{\plain \fs24   Homer's great compliment to Virgil (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.79) has so claimed our \softline
affectionate attention, resonating in its grave 'o' and 'a' sounds, that we have not seen the drama \softline
in the following verse: 'his shade returns that had gone forth.'  What did Homer and Virgil's other \softline
companions think when Beatrice came to Limbo to draw Virgil up to the world of the living?  \softline
They have witnessed this sort of event before, at least once (the harrowing), and perhaps at least \softline
once more (Trajan's latter-day resurrection).  (The strange tale invented by Dante which has it \softline
that Virgil had once been sent }{\plain \fs24 \i down}{\plain \fs24  to the pit of Hell on an errand by Erichtho [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IX.22-30] \softline
does not involve, apparently, his first being raised up to Earth, as does Beatrice's intervention.)  \softline
A student, Elizabeth Statmore (Princeton '82), in a seminar in February 1982 offered an \softline
interesting hypothesis (see Hollander, "A Note on Dante's Missing Musaeus [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  IV, 140-141]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24  5 [1984], p. 219): Virgil's companions thought that he, too, had \softline
now been harrowed.  But no, here he is again, right back where he belongs.  The context of the \softline
previous discussion in the canto (vv. 46-63), with all its concern for the identities of those who \softline
were drawn up to salvation from hell, makes its eventual effect felt here.  The two verses thus \softline
combine to reveal the two-sidedness of Dante's view of Virgil, the greatest poet whom Dante \softline
knows and, because of that greatness, the greatest failure.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 84.}{\plain \fs24   The appearance of the four poets, neither sad nor joyful, reflects their condition of \softline
being 'suspended.'  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  IV.45.  This view was first advanced by Jacopo della \softline
Lana (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.84), who saw them as not being sad because they suffer no physical pain \softline
in Limbo, as not being joyful because they are denied heaven.  This entirely sensible view was \softline
opposed by Boccaccio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.84), who read the detail as only denoting the }{\plain \fs24 \i gravitas}{\plain \fs24  of \softline
these great figures, a reading that avoids any theological framing of their condition.  For details \softline
of the debate thus generated, see Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina \softline
Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 130-36.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 86.}{\plain \fs24   The sword in Homer's hand indicates not only that he was an epic poet, not only that \softline
he is the first among poets, but that, as a result, epic poetry is to be taken as the greatest poetic \softline
genre.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.96.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 88-90.}{\plain \fs24   For all these authors consult the entries found in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Enciclopedia dantesca}{\plain \fs24 : \softline
Guido Martellotti, 'Omero' (ED.1973.4), pp. 145a-148a; Ettore Paratore, 'Ovidio' (ED.1973.4), \softline
pp. 225b-236b; Giorgio Brugnoli and Roberto Mercuri, 'Orazio' (ED.1973.4), pp. 173b-180b; \softline
Ettore Paratore, 'Lucano' (ED.1971.3), pp. 697b-702b.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Alessio and Villa argue that the Latin poets in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i bella scola}{\plain \fs24  are divided into generic \softline
categories as follows: Virgil: tragedy; Ovid: elegy; Horace: satire; Lucan: history.  Missing from \softline
such a list is a representative of comedy.  They argue that almost any reader would have \softline
expected to find Terence's name here, and go on to surmise that Dante has deliberately excluded \softline
Terence as the representative of comedy because he has taken that role unto himself (see Gian \softline
Carlo Alessio and Claudia Villa, "Per }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  I, 67-87," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e la "bella scola" della poesia: \softline
Autorit{\f2 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 , ed. A. A. Iannucci [Ravenna: Longo, 1993 (1984)], pp. 56-58).  For \softline
Dante's knowledge of Terence see Villa, }{\plain \fs24 \i La "lectura Terentii"}{\plain \fs24  (Padua: Antenore, 1984), esp. pp. \softline
137-89.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 88.}{\plain \fs24   See Mazzoni's discussion of what Dante who, not having Greek, could not and did \softline
not read Homer's texts, could in fact know about him ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 137-39.  And now \softline
see Brugnoli, "Omero," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e la "bella scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f2 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 , ed. A. \softline
A. Iannucci (Ravenna: Longo, 1993), pp. 65-85.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 89.}{\plain \fs24   For Horace's medieval reputation as a satirist see Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo \softline
commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. \softline
139-40, and now Claudia Villa ("Dante lettore di Orazio," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e la "bella scola" della \softline
poesia: Autorit{\f2 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 , ed. A. A. Iannucci [Ravenna: Longo, 1993], pp. 87-106) and \softline
Suzanne Reynolds ("}{\plain \fs24 \i Orazio satiro}{\plain \fs24  [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  IV, 89]: Dante, the Roman satirists, and the medieval \softline
theory of satire," in }{\plain \fs24 \i "Libri poetarum in quattuor species dividuntur": Essays on Dante and \softline
"genre,"}{\plain \fs24  ed. Z. G. Baranski, }{\plain \fs24 \i The Italianist}{\plain \fs24 , no. 15 [1995], Supplement, pp. 128-44).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 90.}{\plain \fs24   For the standard bibliography up to 1965 on the subject of Dante's Ovid see \softline
Mazzoni, "Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 (1965), p. 140.  In recent years there has been a growing amount of concerted \softline
attention finally being paid to Dante's enormous debt to Ovid, historically overshadowed by the \softline
at least apparently even greater one to Virgil.  E.g., Rachel Jacoff and Jeffrey T. Schnapp, eds., \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i The Poetry of Allusion: Virgil and Ovid in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  (Stanford: Stanford University \softline
Press, 1991), containing seven essays on Dante's responses to Ovid, and Michelangelo Picone,  \softline
"La }{\plain \fs24 \i lectio Ovidii}{\plain \fs24  nella }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : la ricezione dantesca delle }{\plain \fs24 \i Metamorfosi}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Le Forme e la \softline
Storia}{\plain \fs24  3 (1991), pp. 35-52; "L'Ovidio di Dante," in A. A. Iannucci, ed., }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e la "bella scola" \softline
della poesia}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1993), pp. 107-44; "Dante argonauta: la ricezione dei miti \softline
ovidiani nella }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 ," in M. Picone and B. Zimmermann, eds., }{\plain \fs24 \i Ovidius redivivus: von Ovid \softline
zu Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Stuttgart: M&P Verlag, 1994), pp. 173-202.  And see the lengthy treatment by Marthe \softline
Dozon, }{\plain \fs24 \i Mythe et symbole dans La divine com{\f1\u233\'e9}die}{\plain \fs24  (Florence: Olschki, 1991).\par
}{\plain \fs24  \tab Lucan, not studied enough as source for so many of Dante's verses, is also beginning to \softline
receive more attention.  Again, for the standard bibliography see Mazzoni, pp. 140-41.  And now \softline
see de Angelis, Violetta, "... e l'ultimo Lucano," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e la "bella scola" della poesia}{\plain \fs24 , pp. \softline
145-203; see also the contributions of De Angelis and Schnapp, as well as the appended \softline
discussion, in }{\plain \fs24 \i Seminario dantesco internazionale: Atti del primo convegno tenutosi al Chauncey 
Conference Center, Princeton, 21-23 ottobre 1994}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Z. G. Baranski (Florence: Le Lettere, \softline
1997), pp. 67-145.  For a recent study arguing for Dante's close and highly nuanced reading of \softline
Lucan, one that helps to account for much of the portrait of his Ulysses, see William Stull and \softline
Robert Hollander, "The Lucanian Source of Dante's Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  63 (1991 [1997]), \softline
pp. 1-52.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 93.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil is not suggesting that his fellow ancient poets do well to praise him, but that in \softline
praising him they honor their shared profession.  If there is a 'humanistic' gesture in this canto, \softline
we find it here, 'a solemn celebration of the worth of poetry' (see Padoan, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.93).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 95-96.}{\plain \fs24   Two problems of interpretation continue to assault these lines.  (1) Is the 'lord of \softline
loftiest song' Homer or Virgil?  Most today agree that Homer is meant (railing against one \softline
proponent of Virgil's candidacy Taaffe complains of 'a violence to the text above my \softline
comprehension' [}{\plain \fs24 \i A Comment on the "Divine Comedy" of Dante Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  (London, John Murray, \softline
1822), p. 251]).  (2) Does the relative pronoun in verse 96 refer to the singer or the song?  That \softline
is, is it Homer (or Virgil) who soars above all other poets, or is it the lofty style of epic that flies \softline
higher than all other forms of poetic expression?  Most today prefer the second reading.  This \softline
argument depends heavily upon the reference of the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i altri}{\plain \fs24 .  Those who think that the \softline
second meaning is most likely point out that the adjective seems to refer to }{\plain \fs24 \i canto}{\plain \fs24  in the \softline
preceding line, while a reference to the 'other poets' can only be assumed, since there is no noun \softline
to attach to them.  Our translation leaves the meaning ambivalent, as Dante seems to do.  \softline
Nonetheless, the understanding that Dante probably meant to say that epic, introduced by \softline
Homer, is the highest poetic style really does seem the most likely solution to this in any case not \softline
terribly important problem, since the eventual meaning of the verses is roughly the same.  \softline
Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), p. 145), who also believes that Homeric song is meant, rather \softline
convincingly, following Parodi, points to Dante's assimilation of the eagle to the highest form of \softline
poetic expression in }{\plain \fs24 \i De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24  II.iv.11, a point well taken.  For the perhaps most \softline
challenging arguments in opposition to Mazzoni's, insisting instead that it is Homer who is seen \softline
as the high-flying 'eagle,' see Martellotti 'Omero' (ED.1973.4), p. 145b, and Mengaldo (}{\plain \fs24 \i De \softline
vulgari Eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 , ed. P. V. Mangaldo, in Dante Alighieri, }{\plain \fs24 \i Opere minori}{\plain \fs24 , vol. II (Milan and \softline
Naples, R. Ricciardi, 1979), p. 169.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 99.}{\plain \fs24   The poets' greeting of Dante is the occasion for the only smile found in Inferno.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 101.}{\plain \fs24   In canto II (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . II.105) Lucy tells Beatrice that Dante, for her sake, had left 'the \softline
vulgar herd' (}{\plain \fs24 \i la volgare schiera}{\plain \fs24 ).  Now exactly what this means is a matter of some dispute, yet \softline
some believe that it refers to his distancing himself from the rest of contemporary vernacular \softline
poets in his quite different championing of his own and most special lady.  (See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
II.105.)  Such an interpretation is lent support by the fact that here the word (}{\plain \fs24 \i schiera}{\plain \fs24 ) returns to \softline
designate a quite different group of poets, the great }{\plain \fs24 \i auctores}{\plain \fs24 . (Of the nineteen uses of the noun in \softline
the poem, only these two make it refer to a group that Dante either leaves or joins.)  In this \softline
interpretation Dante makes himself unique among contemporary poets in part because of his \softline
adherence to Beatrice, in part because of his involvement with Virgil and the other great poets of \softline
antiquity.  For a similar view see Selene Sarteschi ("Francesca e il suo poeta: Osservazioni su \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V," }{\plain \fs24 \i L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  18 [2001]), p. 22.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 102.}{\plain \fs24   For a review of the various sorts of discomfort among the commentators occasioned \softline
by Dante's promotion of his own poetic career in this verse (some going so far as to insist that he \softline
displays humility here rather than pride) see Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 147-54.  This is not \softline
to take issue with the position taken by Sarolli, shared by the great French Dante scholar Etienne \softline
Gilson, that Dante in fact generally does present himself as humble in taking on the burden of \softline
this poem in order to do the work of God (}{\plain \fs24 \i Prolegomena alla "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: \softline
Olschki, 1971], p. 385n.).  However, it is clear that Dante is putting himself in very good \softline
company on the basis of very little accomplishment: a series of lyrics, the }{\plain \fs24 \i Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 , two \softline
unfinished treatises, and three cantos of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24 .  His daring is amazing.  However, we ought \softline
to consider that most of his readers today will readily agree that he is not only justly included in \softline
this company of the great poets of all time between Homer and Dante, but is one of its foremost \softline
members.  It was a dangerous gesture for him to have made.  It is redeemed by his genius.  \softline
Taaffe translates Biagioli's response in precisely this mode (}{\plain \fs24 \i A Comment on the "Divine Comedy" \softline
of Dante Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  [London, John Murray, 1822]), p. 252: 'Who but will admire, if not entirely \softline
blind, the modesty of our poet in calling himself only the }{\plain \fs24 \i sixth}{\plain \fs24  in a company, where he is really \softline
on a perfect equality with the }{\plain \fs24 \i first}{\plain \fs24 ?'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For a possible source for this verse see Hermann Gmelin, }{\plain \fs24 \i Kommentar: die H{\f1\u246\'f6}lle}{\plain \fs24  \softline
(Stuttgart: Klett, 1966), p. 91: Ovid's }{\plain \fs24 \i Tristia}{\plain \fs24  (IX.x.54), where that poet makes himself fourth in \softline
the line of poets after Tibullus, Gallus, and Propertius.  And we should look ahead to }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  \softline
XXI.91 when the inclusion of Statius will make Dante not the sixth but the seventh (a more \softline
propitious number?) in this group.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab That there are forty named or otherwise identified inhabitants in Limbo is probably not \softline
accidental (the five poets and the thirty-five later observed with them in the precincts of the \softline
noble castle).  In one tradition of medieval numerology the 'number' of man is four (of God \softline
three).  In a widely practiced mode of medieval 'counting,' 40 = 4 + 0 = 4.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 104-105.}{\plain \fs24   What was the subject under discussion that is now not reported?  Mazzoni \softline
("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965], pp. 154-56), following an early indication of D'Ovidio's, argues that the \softline
subject is poetry, or the secrets of those involved in this sacred art, adducing as evidence two \softline
passages in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  XXII (vv. 104-105; 127-129).  In the first of these Virgil tells Statius that \softline
he and his poetic companions in Limbo often speak of the Muses; then Dante is allowed to \softline
overhear Statius and Virgil speaking of the art of poetic making.  To be sure, the poet \softline
deliberately refuses (and this will not be the last time) to tell us what was said.  Yet it is clear \softline
that we are meant to wonder what it was, and to come up with some sort of reasonable \softline
hypothesis in explanation.  No writer would otherwise include such a provocative detail.  At the \softline
same time, our hypothetical responses should be a simple as possible and -- like Mazzoni's -- \softline
based on evidence found within the poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 106-111.}{\plain \fs24   The noble castle with its seven walls and surrounding stream that Dante and \softline
the poets walk over as though it were dry land in order then to pass through the seven gates and \softline
into a green meadow: what do these things signify?  It is clear that here we are dealing with the \softline
conventional kind of allegory, in which poetic objects stand for abstract ideas.  But which ones?  \softline
As is often the case, allegories (here, a brief extended metaphor) of this kind have proven to be \softline
extremely difficult for Dante's readers, and not only for his modern readers.  Mazzoni ("Saggio 
di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 \softline
[1965]) once again devotes a good deal of space to the history of the question (pp. 156-68); yet it \softline
cannot be said that he has resolved it.  Is the castle the good life of the human being without \softline
Grace, all that can be done with the moral and speculative virtues that pagans could perfect \softline
despite their lack of faith (Mazzoni)?  Or does the castle represent philosophy, with its seven \softline
disciplines (physics, metaphysics, ethics, politics, economics, mathematics, and dialectic \softline
[Padoan, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.106])?  Or something else?  And what does it mean that the pagan \softline
poets and Dante all can cross the stream as though it were not water?  Surely it stands for some \softline
impediment that keeps the rest of the inhabitants of limbo out, since apparently only those \softline
worthy of entrance can move over it.  There are thirty-five designated inhabitants within the \softline
walls and fully two-fifths of these are 'actives' (and the majority of these are women: eight of the \softline
fourteen).  The more numerous 'contemplatives' -- if they were the only inhabitants discussed -- \softline
might indicate that the castle stands for 'philosophy.'  But what have Caesar, Camilla, Latinus, or \softline
Lavinia got to do with philosophy?  What, then, do the castle and its surroundings stand for?  \softline
The best that human beings can be without God, in whatever precise further formulation: that \softline
seems a plausible, if not satisfying, response to Dante's riddle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 113.}{\plain \fs24   On the meaning and importance of Dante's word }{\plain \fs24 \i autorit{\f2 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 , as well as the distinction \softline
between }{\plain \fs24 \i auctores}{\plain \fs24  (those who add to previous entities) and }{\plain \fs24 \i autores}{\plain \fs24  (those who have authority in \softline
themselves and in what they do) in Uguccione of Pisa, recapitulated in }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24  IV.vi.3-5, see \softline
Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 168-70.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 115-117.}{\plain \fs24   The resemblance to the vision of the Elysian fields (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . VI.752-755) was not \softline
lost on Boccaccio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.115) -- nor on Pietro di Dante before him, in the third \softline
redaction of his commentary (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.118-123; discussed by Mazzoni, "Saggio di un \softline
nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965], p. \softline
172).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 123.}{\plain \fs24   For the not unusual medieval view that Caesar was the first emperor, see }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24  \softline
IV.v.12.  For the Suetonian source of his falcon-like eyes see Campi (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.123).  \softline
That Caesar is here in armor may well be a reminder of his crossing of the Rubicon in arms to \softline
attack Rome (see William Stull and Robert Hollander, "The Lucanian Source of Dante's \softline
Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  63 [1991 (1997)], p. 36).  (Pertile wonders at the reasons for Caesar's \softline
being in arms -- "Il nobile castello, il paradiso terrestre e l'umanesimo dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i Filologia e \softline
critica}{\plain \fs24  5 [1980], p. 17.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 124-125.}{\plain \fs24   The 1921 edition had no punctuation at the end of verse 124 and thus made the \softline
phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i da l'altra parte}{\plain \fs24  modify Camilla and Penthesilea.  Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo \softline
l'antica vulgata, Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ), pp. 72-73, argues convincingly for the current punctuation and the \softline
phrase's relation to Latinus and Lavinia.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For the possible importance of Jerome{\u8217\'92}s notion of Camilla as heroic and royal virgin \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Adversus Iovinianum}{\plain \fs24  I.41) for Dante{\u8217\'92}s conception of her see Rodney J. Lokaj, {\u8220\'93}Camilla, l{\u8217\'92}Italia \softline
e il Veltro,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i Critica del testo}{\plain \fs24  3 (2000), pp. 665-77.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 129.}{\plain \fs24   That Saladin, for all the good report that he enjoyed, is included by Dante in Limbo 
(along with two other 'infidels,' Avicenna and Averroes, at vv. 143-144) is nonetheless \softline
extraordinary.  They are the only three 'moderns' in Limbo, all representatives of that Islamic \softline
culture which Dante elsewise saw in such bitterly negative terms and only as the enemy of \softline
Christendom.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 131.}{\plain \fs24   This 'master' of knowledge, the teacher of philosophy for nearly every major \softline
thinker in the Middle Ages, is, of course, Aristotle.  For two important studies in English of the \softline
Aristotelian basis of Dante's thought see Patrick Boyde, }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Philomythes and Philosopher: \softline
Man in the Cosmos}{\plain \fs24  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981) and }{\plain \fs24 \i Perception and passion \softline
in Dante's "Comedy"}{\plain \fs24  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 140-141.}{\plain \fs24   For the absence of Musaeus from the familar 'trinome' Orpheus-Musaeus-Linus, the first so-called 'theological poets' in various classical (e.g., Aristotle) and Christian \softline
(e.g., St. Augustine, St. Thomas) formulations see Hollander ("A Note on Dante's Missing \softline
Musaeus [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  IV, 140-141]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24  5 [1984], pp. 217-21).  The hypothesis \softline
of that discussion is that only in Virgil's fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i Eclogue}{\plain \fs24  would Dante have found Orpheus and \softline
Linus treated together and without Musaeus.  Virgil's vaunt in his poem is that in his song he will \softline
outdo the efforts of Orpheus and Linus.  But now we find him in Limbo with them, three \softline
classical failures in Dante's harsh, judgmental Christian view.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab As Petrocchi points out (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata, Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ), pp. 74-75, the \softline
unfamiliarity of Linus to most medieval scribes caused major problems in their transcriptions \softline
early in the manuscript tradition, some of which continue.  Without Orpheus as part of the \softline
interlacing of these pairs of poets (Orpheus and Linus) and of moral philosophers (Cicero and \softline
Seneca), the confusion might have spread even farther than it has, although it still has some \softline
victims at its door.  Linus, the }{\plain \fs24 \i lectio difficilior}{\plain \fs24 , has nonetheless outlasted Livy as keeper of a \softline
place in Limbo. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab As for Seneca, as opposed to the widespread notion (shared, for instance, by Toynbee) \softline
that Dante, like others in his time, believed that Seneca the moralist and Seneca the tragedian \softline
were two different persons, Mazzoni has argued ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina \softline
Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 [1965]), pp. 197-200), utilizing the \softline
work on the subject by Billanovich, that this confusion was only operative after Boccaccio's \softline
erroneous suppositions at mid-century (which eventually misled Petrarch into making the same \softline
mistake).  For a fuller presentation of Toynbee's views, see his "Dante and 'Seneca morale,'" in \softline
his }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies and Researches}{\plain \fs24  (Port Washington, NY: Kennikat Press, 1971 [1902]), pp. \softline
150-56.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 143-144.}{\plain \fs24   For Dante's surprising 'liberality' in including Avicenna and Averroes in Limbo \softline
see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.129.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 145-147.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's abrupt switch to the role of author from that of narrator is noteworthy.  \softline
With the exception of the invocation in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  II.7, this is the first time he has assumed that \softline
role, this time addressing remarks }{\plain \fs24 \i about}{\plain \fs24  the poem to us, his readers: 'I cannot give account of all \softline
of them, for the length of my theme so drives me on, the telling often comes short of the fact.'  \softline
The effect is, as we have observed before (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.64-66), to put together an \softline
appeal to his experience as voyager, returned from a veracious visit to the otherworld, and \softline
insistence on his absolute control over what he has in fact invented.  As readers we are aware 
that it is he who has created the inhabitants of Limbo; his remark both insists that he is only \softline
recording what he observed and simultaneously allows a shared understanding of his \softline
contrivance.  What is genial in it is that it turns his reader into a collaborator.  The use of the \softline
word }{\plain \fs24 \i tema}{\plain \fs24  (here 'poetic subject') underlines the literary nature of the enterprise.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab A strategic awareness of the evident difference in perspective between narrator and \softline
character is, surprisingly enough, a fairly recent development.  See Leo Spitzer, "A Note on the \softline
Poetic and the Empirical 'I' in Medieval Authors," }{\plain \fs24 \i Traditio}{\plain \fs24  4 (1946), pp. 414-22; Charles \softline
Singleton, }{\plain \fs24 \i An Essay on the "Vita Nuova"}{\plain \fs24  (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1977 \softline
[1949], p. 25; Gianfranco Contini, }{\plain \fs24 \i Un' idea di Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Turin: Einaudi, 1976 [1958]), pp. 33-62; \softline
Rocco Montano, }{\plain \fs24 \i Storia della poesia di Dante}{\plain \fs24 , vol. I (Naples: Quaderni di Delta, 1962), pp. 367-76.  See also Michelangelo Picone, "Dante come autore/narratore della }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Nuova \softline
Rivista di Letteratura Italiana}{\plain \fs24  2 (1999), pp. 9-26, as well as Mario Aversano, "}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX: \softline
sulla pena dei simoniaci," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dialogo e profezia nella "Commedia" dantesca}{\plain \fs24 , ed. F. Spera \softline
(Milan: CUEM, 1999), p. 40 and n., pointing out that Francesco D'Ovidio, }{\plain \fs24 \i Il canto dei Simoniaci}{\plain \fs24  \softline
(Naples: Guida, 1932), p. 279, had already made a telling observation along exactly these lines.\par
}}