{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fswiss \fcharset0 \fprq2 Arial;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs26 \b\f1\fs26 INFERNO CANTO 07}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Plutus, the god of wealth in classical myth, wishes to prevent the passage of this living \softline
soul through Satan's kingdom.  That, at least, is what we must surmise from Virgil's reaction, vv. \softline
4-6, which assuages Dante's fear.  There is a program of demonic resistance that makes Dante \softline
fearful throughout Inferno: Charon (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.91-93), Minos (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.19-20), Cerberus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.22-24), Phlegyas (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.18), the Furies (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.52-54), the Minotaur (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.14-15), Geryon \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.25-27), Malacoda and the Malebranche (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.23-XXIII.57), Nimrod (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXXI.67), Satan (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.22-27).  In almost all of these scenes it is Virgil's task to quell the \softline
resistance of the infernal guardians and to reassure his charge.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Pape Sat{\f3 \'42}n, Pape Sat{\f3 \'42}n, aleppe}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  The third verse suggests that Virgil understands these \softline
words spoken by Plutus.  If that is correct, he is perhaps the only one to have done so.  Over the \softline
centuries a continuing debate addresses, rather confusedly, the precise nature of these five words: \softline
whether they are part of a recognizable language or not; whether they are totally meaningless or \softline
have some meaning; whether they are an invocation of the power of Satan against invading Dante \softline
or an oath giving expression to the monster's surprise at the presence of a living soul in hell.  For a \softline
review of the question see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante and Paul's "five words with understanding}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," \softline
Occasional Papers, No. 1, Center for Medieval and Early Renaissance Texts and Studies \softline
[Binghamton, NY: Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1992]), who sees this and \softline
Nimrod's similarly nonsensical five words (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.67) as parodic inversions of the five words \softline
of clear speech called for by St. Paul, concerned about the over-reliance of the faithful on \softline
speaking in tongues (I Corinthians 14:19).  Plutus's oath may be garbled speech, but it does \softline
contain 'pseudo-words' that have meaning: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Pape}{\plain \fs24 \f1  represents either a Latin interjection (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 papae}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) of \softline
admiration, as many ancient commentators think, or/and a debased form of the Italian and Latin \softline
for 'pope' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 papa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.47: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 papi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ); }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sat{\f3 \'42}n}{\plain \fs24 \f1  would fairly clearly seem to be a form of the \softline
Italian 'Satana' or of the Latin 'Sathanas' and thus 'Satan'; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 aleppe}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as some of the first \softline
commentators noticed, is the Italian form of the Hebrew word for the first letter of the alphabet, \softline
'aleph,' as in the Latin expression 'alpha ed omega' (the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet, \softline
signifying 'the beginning and the end'), as God defines Himself in the Bible (Apoc. 1:8, repeated at \softline
Apoc. 21:6 and Apoc. 22:13).  If one had to render these nonsense words in English one might \softline
say something like 'O Pope Satan, my god.'  Fortunately, one does not have to.  For the \softline
connection of these words in mixed language to those in the first verses of the seventh canto of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (there, naturally, totally positive in tone and meaning) -- the parallelism is certainly \softline
striking -- see Gian Roberto Sarolli, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Prolegomena alla "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Olschki, \softline
1971), pp. 289-90.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Lorenzo Renzi ("Un aspetto del plurilinguismo medievale: dalla lingua dei re magi a 'Pap{\f2\u233\'e9} \softline
satan aleppe,'" in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Omaggio a Gianfranco Folena}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Pier Vincenzo Mengaldo [Padua: Editoriale \softline
Programma, 1993]), pp. 61-73, presents evidence for a possible connection between instances of \softline
glossalalia in French medieval plays, some of which come from the mouths of pagan deities, and \softline
Dante's polyglot phrase here and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXI.67.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That Virgil refers to Plutus as a wolf ties him to the vice of avarice, since in this poem \softline
wolves are often symbols of that vice (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.10; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.132; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.55).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In justifying Dante's status as visitor to the infernal regions, Virgil refers to the war 
in heaven (see Apoc.12:7-9), where the archangel Michael is specifically mentioned as a warrior in \softline
the battle that sent Satan down into hell with his minions, the fallen angels.  Dante's treatment \softline
makes it seem that Plutus felt his kinship with these creatures, whom the travelers will encounter \softline
at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.82-84.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's words, telling exactly how things are with respect to demonic rebellion, are \softline
enough to crumple the irascible spirit of Plutus.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The author's apostrophe of God's justice reminds us of the centrality of this concern \softline
to the entire }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.4.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-23.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 locus classicus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  for the description of the tumultuous meeting of the Ionian \softline
and Mediterranean seas between Sicily and the Italian mainland is found in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.420-433.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's Italian makes it clear that this dance is the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ridda}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a popular dance in which the \softline
linked participants reverse the direction of their circling movement with the playing and singing \softline
each new strophe.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the relatively greater number of condemned souls devoted to avarice see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.608-611, the Sibyl's description of Tartarus, which includes a description of the \softline
punishment of (unnamed) Sisyphus, eternally rolling his stone (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.616).  Dante appropriates \softline
these two details to build the details of his fourth Circle.  Virgil's brief description of those who \softline
loved riches to excess is without reference to those of the precisely opposite inclination.  In \softline
Dante's formulation, prodigality is the opposite form of the same vice.  This is one of the few \softline
examples in the code of ethics found in this poem in which an Aristotelian measure seems to be at \softline
work, in which a 'golden mean' locates the correct or permissible amount of affection or desire.  \softline
(See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.42 for confirmation that there is a proper measure in such things).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the 'Satanic style' of this encounter see Franco Suitner, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La poesia satirica e giocosa \softline
nell'et{\f3 \'42} dei comuni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Padova: Editrice Antenore, 1983), p. 67.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-35.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It has not often been noted, but, seen from above, the avaricious and prodigal \softline
perform a perfect circle in their movement.  Their activities in hell (as was true in the world \softline
above) mount up to exactly zero.  This nullity is reflected in their nameless and unidentifiable \softline
condition here; and their circling is to be compared to that performed by Fortune's wheel (see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.90).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's sympathetic responses to various of the damned usually indicates a sense of \softline
identity with them.  On this occasion, it would rather seem to reveal his horror at the nature of \softline
this punishment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 38-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante allows himself a fairly traditional anti-clerical thrust.  Christ had led his \softline
followers in embracing poverty and, much later, the mendicant orders took vows of poverty, some \softline
in remembrance of St. Francis's imitation of Christ in this respect.  Thus, while avarice in any \softline
person respected for a higher calling would be disgraceful, it is particularly so in a member of the \softline
clegy and becomes an easy (and popular) target.  It is notable that the clergy are noticed only here 
-- and in number -- among the avaricious; none of them is pointed out among the prodigal.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The insistence on the large number of clerics among the avaricious (and no other \softline
social orders are identified as being avaricious, not even bankers or money-lenders) continues, \softline
now including a plurality of popes.  The anonymous plurality of popes mentioned in v. 47 leaves \softline
the reader free to supply any number of such pontiffs.  The essential impression left by the poem \softline
as a whole is that more popes are damned than saved.  This is probably true, but Dante does insist \softline
that a number of popes are in fact saved.  The first and foremost is of course Saint Peter, \softline
considered by Dante and medieval writers in general as being the first pope.  He is seen in \softline
paradise by Dante in the Heaven of the Fixed Stars, where he has a major role as speaker, but he \softline
is referred to from the beginning of the poem to its end (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.24; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.133).  And Peter \softline
himself is the one who tells of the salvations of six other early popes: his two immediate \softline
successors Linus and Cletus, both martyred in the first century (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.41), as well as four \softline
other popes martyred, according to a tradition that Dante followed, in the second and third \softline
centuries: Sixtus I, Pius I, Calixtus I, and Urban I (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.44).  Also mentioned as being \softline
saved are Agapetus I (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.16) and Gregory I (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII.133-135).  We see Pope Adrian \softline
V purging his lethargy on the road to heaven (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.99) and Pope Martin IV repenting his \softline
zest for eating eels also on his way to paradise (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.22).  And there is Pope John XXI, \softline
seen as present in the Heaven of the Sun and hence among the blessed (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.134).  There are \softline
thus twelve popes who are indicated as being among God's chosen.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Several other popes are referred to, but without having their eventual destinations under \softline
God's justice made plain.  Such is the case with respect to Sylvester I (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.94), Clement \softline
IV (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.125), Innocent III (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.92), and Honorius III (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.98).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The case of the popes who are damned is more complex.  Here is an attempt to list the \softline
fallen pontiffs referred to in the poem.  If the one 'who made the great refusal' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.60) is, as \softline
many believe, Pope Celestine V, he would be the first damned pope whom we see.  He is followed \softline
by the unnamed pontiffs of canto VII and then by Anastasius II (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.8).  Many believe that \softline
Innocent IV is the most certain presence in the unnamed line of precursors alluded to by Nicholas \softline
III (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.73) -- a second instance of a plurality of damned popes, while the saved ones are \softline
never referred to in this way.  Those that are confirmed as damned are Nicholas himself (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XIX.70), Boniface VIII (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.53), Clement V (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.83), and, a last for good measure, \softline
John XXII (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.58).  Thus at least five popes are definitively damned.  In two cases, as \softline
we have seen, Dante opens the door to other possibilities.  As a result, the absolute possible low is \softline
nine (five plus the plural 'papi' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.47 and 'altri' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.73 -- there must be at least two \softline
in each case to account for the plural).  Celestine would bring the total to ten.  In short, Dante \softline
probably did mean to encourage his readers to believe exactly what most of them seem to believe \softline
-- that more popes were damned than were saved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That is, the avaricious will have their fists clamped in remembrance of their grasping \softline
behaviors, while the prodigal will have their hair shorn to remind them of their lack of care for \softline
their possessions (and themselves).  Sinclair, in his note to this verse, cites an old Italian proverb: \softline
a prodigal spends 'even to the hair of his head.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 62-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's discourse on the nature and effect of Fortune on mortal lives is notable for \softline
its sunniness and equability.  The usual and necessary citation among commentators is of 
Boethius, whose }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Consolation of Philosophy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is the standard medieval text on the subject and was \softline
well known to Dante.  The Lady Philosophy explains to complaining Boethius that humans who \softline
suffer like to blame their misfortune on bad luck, expressed by the fortune that turns its back on \softline
them.  What philosophy makes plain is that the fault lies in ourselves, in that we pitch our hopes \softline
on things we should recognize as fallible, fleeting, and of ultimately little importance.  What Dante \softline
adds to this stern message is a sense of calmness about and even positive acceptance of these facts \softline
of human existence.  Fortune may be understood as, in the happy formulation of Charles \softline
Grandgent (in his proem to this canto), 'the Angel of Earth.'  Nothing that she does should be \softline
unexpected; everything that she does is 'right.'  Exactly such an understanding may be found in \softline
Dante's own words in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.ix.8), where he says that the force that distributes the \softline
goods of the world, victory or defeat in battle, which the pagans attributed to their gods, 'we \softline
call... by the more appropriate and accurate name "divine providence."'  Particularly helpful \softline
discussions of Dante's understanding of fortune may be found in Vincenzo Cioffari's book (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The \softline
Conception of Fortune and Fate in the Works of Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge, Mass.: Dante Society of \softline
Cambridge, Mass., 1940]), Gianluigi Toja'a article ("La Fortuna," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  42 [1965], pp. \softline
247-60) and Padoan's various remarks on this passage in his commentary (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.70, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.71, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.78, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.80, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.85, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.86, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.94, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.95, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.96).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The distance that Dante has traveled from the position he took in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.xi.6-8), \softline
where the unequal distribution of goods among humans is seen as a defect of Fortune's agency, is \softline
manifest.  In that passage Fortune is seen as acting randomly; here she is provident (verse 86) -- \softline
and we should remember that she was traditionally portrayed as blind-folded, unseeing as she acts.  \softline
In this passage, as one of the angelic hierarchy, she turns her famous 'wheel' in knowledge and in \softline
bliss.  God's in His heaven, Fortune turns her wheel, all's right with the world, which is only and \softline
absolutely as it should be.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's desire to 'feed' his confused 'offspring' so that he may give over his foolish \softline
view of Fortune will mark a turning point in the protagonist's understanding.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's 'serpent hidden in the grass' has been seen, at least from the sixteenth century \softline
on, as being a translation of Virgil's third Eclogue, verse 93: 'latet anguis in herba.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 altri d{\f3 \'50}i}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , literally 'other gods,' translated as 'other heavenly powers,' are the other \softline
nine orders of angels.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The rapid tranformations of human states are summarized in the Casini/Barbi \softline
commentary (to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.96) as follows: a given human being may typically move, along eight \softline
points on Fortune's wheel, from humility, to patience, to peace, to riches, to pride, to impatience, \softline
to war, to poverty.  This is a typical 'ride' of anyone tied to Fortune's wheel, ending back at the \softline
starting point.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.31-35.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 98-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's indication of the time reveals that it is now after midnight, some six hours \softline
after the travelers set out at 6 pm on Friday evening.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The river Styx has a classical history probably, for Dante, most notably in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
VI.323.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Clearly the protagonist, gazing upon the inhabitants of the fifth Circle, is \softline
looking at the wrathful.  The problem for interpreters is that wrath, or anger, is a sin of violence, \softline
not one of incontinence; yet the poem has not yet left the realm of incontinence behind.  Without \softline
reviewing the fairly vast literature upon this problem, one can offer some uncomplicated solutions, \softline
based on the thirteenth chapter of St. Thomas's commentary on Aristotle's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ethics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.5).  \softline
Aristotle, in Thomas's paraphrase, distinguishes three kinds of anger: choleric (which comes upon \softline
one quickly and quickly departs), bitter (which lasts long in the heart of the afflicted person, and is \softline
not released easily), difficult (which is more hostile, longer-lasting, and directed against those it \softline
should not be, and which is not released until the one experiencing this kind of wrath inflicts injury \softline
upon an enemy).  It seems clear that Dante here shows the punishment of the first sort of wrath in \softline
the choleric, who are not guilty of sins of violence, but of intemperance.  (For the second set of \softline
sinners punished here, see the next note.)  In this reading, the third form of anger, which has as its \softline
intention physical harm to another, is punished only in the realm of the violent against others, in \softline
canto XII -- where it should be, and not as a sin of intemperance, which these first two are.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Those who are punished under the surface of the Styx are, in this formulation \softline
(see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.109-114), what St. Thomas characterizes as Aristotle's second set of the \softline
wrathful, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 amari}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or 'bitter.'  These people kept their anger in, suffering gravely within \softline
themselves (as opposed to the choleric, quick to vent their anger in insults and blows).  Dante's \softline
inventive representation of this kind of wrath shows its exemplars as experiencing the 'muddy' or \softline
'smoky' sensation of stifled anger.\par
}}