{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fswiss \fcharset0 \fprq2 Arial;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 09}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante has gone white with cowardice.  Seing this, Virgil tries to compose his own \softline
features.  In canto VIII.121 (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.121) Virgil was angry, and this fact leads many \softline
commentators to believe that the color in his face now is still the red flush of anger.  On the other \softline
hand, others believe (and over the centuries there are roughly as many of one opinion as the \softline
other) that Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 new}{\plain \fs24 \f1  color just now is the pallor of frustration and shame.  Either reading is \softline
possible.  Guido da Pisa believed Virgil had gone pale, supporting this view with a citation of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.209-210), where Aeneas, 'sick with care, feigns hope in his face while stifling the \softline
anguish deep in his heart.'  If the poet had this passage in mind, it would seem likely that he \softline
imagined Virgil, like Aeneas feeling defeated but needing to raise the spirits of whoever depends \softline
on him, having turned from florid to pale in facial color and now trying to compose himself.  \softline
However, Dante's verb, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ristrinse}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , literally 'restrained' or 'clamped down on,' would be much more \softline
appropriate to controlling anger than ridding oneself of malaise.  Either reading is supportable, but \softline
red is probably the better choice, especially since we then have the dramatic contrast between \softline
white-cheeked Dante and red-faced Virgil.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's doubt and ensuing confirmation has caused considerable difficulty, in \softline
particular the clause 'tal ne s'offerse' (v. 8).  There has been debate over the validity of this reading \softline
in the Italian text, and over the meaning of this particular choice, accepted by most as being the \softline
most likely.  Most commentators are certain that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tal}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ('such' or 'such a one') refers to Beatrice, \softline
whether specifically or in general (e.g., such aid was offered to us [by Beatrice]).  The overall \softline
sense of the tercet is, however, probably clear enough: 'we must win this fight unless (I did not \softline
understand what Beatrice told me)....  No, what she said must be true; but I wish the promised \softline
help from heaven would get here.'  Musa's remark on the passage bears repeating (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Advent at the \softline
Gates}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1974]), p. 73: 'because during his lifetime \softline
[Virgil] could not believe in the coming of Christ, so now he can not believe in the coming of the \softline
angel -- in spite of his having learned from Beatrice that the Pilgrim's journey is willed in Heaven.'  \softline
In other words, Virgil, condemned to hell for not having had faith, repeats that error even now.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A fairly rare example of an interpretive exercise embedded in the poetic text itself, \softline
Dante as glossator of Virgil's words and presenter of his own understanding as he heard them.  \softline
What he thought, then, was perhaps that Virgil was afraid that they would be left in hell, in which \softline
case Dante would have  perished.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 17.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'first circle' is Limbo, where Virgil and the other virtuous heathens have their \softline
eternal resting place, and where, in his own words, 'without hope we live in longing' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.42).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's narrative of his having had his spirit conjured from the dead by the witch \softline
Erichtho may have reassured the protagonist; it has raised nothing but questions among Dante \softline
scholars.  Boccaccio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.25-27), Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.25-27), \softline
and Francesco da Buti (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.16-30), in their respective commentaries, correctly \softline
understand that Dante is here inventing new material, unsanctioned by any classical source.  In \softline
fact, this may be the single most outrageous example of the utter liberty Dante at times employs in \softline
his treatment of classical literature.  No such tale exists in any other text before Dante's, nor 
anything like it.  While many point to the similar statement made by the Sibyl, hoping to reassure \softline
Aeneas that she has been shown by Hecate (Proserpina) the places of the underworld (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VI.562-565), no one has come close to finding a source for a Virgilian journey to the depths of \softline
hell under the spell of Erichtho.  This Thessalian witch appears in a crucial role in Lucan's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Pharsalia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the later poet's rather nasty version of Virgil's more benign Sibyl.  In a lengthy episode \softline
in the sixth book (vv. 507-830) of Lucan's poem, a book with evident parallels to the descent to \softline
the underworld in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , replete with Sibyl-like guide in the person of Erichtho, the witch \softline
holds center stage.  Serving the curiosity of Sextus Pompeius, son of the great Pompey, one of the \softline
major republican opponents of Caesar in the civil war, she agrees to foretell the outcome of the \softline
war by practicing her necromantic art on the corpse of a recently slain soldier.  What the soldier \softline
tells is hardly pleasant news, but is hardly complete, either.  He does make plain to Sextus that the \softline
ghost of his father will come to him in Sicily (Lucan, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.812-813) in order to reveal still \softline
more (but Lucan committed suicide by Nero's order before finishing the poem, and the scene was \softline
not written).  It is out of these materials that Dante has concocted his idiosyncratic tale.  To what \softline
end?  Surely it besmirches Virgil, whom we first hear of, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II, as being given a much \softline
different posthumous treatment by Beatrice, who 'harrowed' him from Limbo for five days of duty \softline
in the Christian afterworld.  Now it turns out that this was not the only time, that he had \softline
previously been used for nefarious purpose by Erichtho.  And what is it that she wanted?  In \softline
Lucan's poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.586-587) we learn that her greatest desire is to be able to mangle the \softline
corpses of Julius Caesar (the poem is set before the murder of Caesar -- 44 BC) and of Pompey.  \softline
Virgil died in 19 BC.  As he says in this narrative, Erichtho called him (like the young soldier in \softline
Lucan's poem, only recently dead) back into his body shortly after he died and sent him down to \softline
the ninth Circle, Judecca (apparently bearing that name even before Judas committed suicide in 34 \softline
AD -- or else Virgil is merely using the current form of it).  Why?  Those who have written on this \softline
problem have not developed any hypothesis to account for her motive.  Yet Dante surely would \softline
have given her one in the myth that he was constructing.  Or Virgil is simply making up a tall \softline
story in order to give himself authority -- a dubious hypothesis embraced by some.  But for the \softline
view that his account rather undermines than girds that authority see Stefano Prandi, "I gesti di \softline
Virgilio," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  172 (1995), pp. 56-57.  And for more on this \softline
problem see Sonia Gentili ("La necromanzia di Eritone da Lucano a Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e il "locus \softline
inferni": Creazione letteraria e tradizione interpretativa}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Simona Fo{\f3 \'42} e Sonia Gentili (Rome: \softline
Bulzoni, 2000 [= }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi (e testi) italiani}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 (1999)], pp. 13-43).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab We know from Lucan that Erichtho had an unfulfilled ambition, to ravage the corpses of \softline
Caesar and Pompey.  Where are these located in Dante?  Caesar is in Limbo; of Pompey we hear \softline
little (Dante is as spare in his mention of him as is Virgil), and nothing about his station in the \softline
afterlife.  Since saved pagans always seem to merit Dante's notice (Ripheus, Cato, Statius, and \softline
Trajan) we can probably safely assume that Pompey is not one of these.  If he is then to be \softline
considered one of the damned, where would he be found?  Of the four great republican figures in \softline
the civil wars, Cato is in purgatory and on his way to heaven, Brutus and Cassius are in hell, \softline
precisely in the ninth Circle.  Is Pompey there as well?  It seems a likely possibility.  Lucan has \softline
him translated to the heavens after his murder and deified (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.1-18); Dante surely admired \softline
his youthful achievements (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.53) and apparently avoided making him noticeable among the \softline
damned.  However, it is at least possible that he is playing a game with his reader here.  As a co-conspirator of Brutus and Cassius, would Pompey not naturally have been punished along with \softline
them, since he is not, like Cato, miraculously saved?  That seems possible.  (A student, Sara Van 
Rheenan, Princeton '90, has gone so far as to suggest that Pompey was the third sinner in Satan's \softline
jaws before Judas replaced him in 34 AD.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Virgil does not tell us whether he actually brought back a spirit from the depths or not.  \softline
Dante's invention is probably outrageous enough as it stands.  But we can perhaps glimpse the \softline
justification of Erichtho's wish, her delayed victory over dead Pompey, as well as the strange \softline
fulfillment of Erichtho's and Lucan's promise of a return to the earth of Pompey's ghost.  It seems \softline
a notion worth considering.  And if that hypothesis seems overbold, we can retreat to a simpler \softline
one but even less likely one, leaving the soul of Pompey in relative obscurity and peace: Virgil is \softline
sent down to bring back either Brutus or Cassius.  In fact some sixty years ago Ernesto Trucchi \softline
attempted exactly such aa explanation, arguing, with no further justification, that Virgil was sent \softline
down to bring back Brutus (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.22-30).  Gregorio Di Siena had already suggested \softline
that Virgil had been sent down to move Dido, at first placed in Judecca for betraying Sichaeus [!], \softline
from there to the Circle of lust (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.23).  Whatever justification we seek for this \softline
strange tale of Virgil's first visit to the realm of the damned, we probably should try to find it in \softline
the pages of Lucan.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Boccaccio was the first and perhaps lone discussant (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.25-27) to think of \softline
the only biblical tale that contains similar elements (and was surely familiar to Dante), the story of \softline
Saul's visit to the witch of Endor, who calls up the spirit of Samuel for Saul; the latter -- in a \softline
scene more powerful than even anything in Lucan -- foretells Saul's death and the defeat of the \softline
Israelites at the hands of the Philistines (I Samuel 28:3-25).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Judecca, the ninth Circle, named for Judas, betrayer, like all those punished there with \softline
him, of a rightful lord and master.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   His tale told, Virgil's point is clear: 'I have been all the way down to the bottom of \softline
the pit; you can trust in my guidance.'  The 'heaven that encircles all' is almost certainly the \softline
Crystalline Sphere, or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 primum mobile}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  If the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 girare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here has the sense of 'makes turn,' and \softline
not 'surrounds,' as some believe, the reference then is surely to the Crystalline Sphere, for it sets \softline
all the rest of the spheres in motion, even though it is itself motionless.  As for the choice between \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 girare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as 'cause to turn' or 'make a circle around,' all the early commentators who deal with the \softline
term think in terms of the latter.  However, from the sixteenth century until halfway into the \softline
twentieth the large majority of commentators chose the former, citing }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.70, \softline
where the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 primum mobile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is described as setting the other spheres in motion in somewhat similar \softline
terms to what might be expressed here.  Currently, following the observation of Porena (comm. to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.25-27) that, since the earth in not in motion in Dante's astronomy, the verb in this sense \softline
cannot apply to 'all,' most commentators have returned to the earlier understanding.  It is probably \softline
of some import that the earliest commentators, probably with a closer sense of Dante's vocabulary \softline
than ours, choose as they do.  Further, Dante only rarely uses }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 girare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the second sense discussed \softline
here, more usually using the first.  There are some four dozen uses of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 girare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the poem, and \softline
relatively rarely does the verb seem to have the sense of 'cause a thing to move in a circular path,' \softline
e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.139; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.6; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.62; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.81; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.119; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.14.  \softline
Far more often (some 17 times) the verb is used as a synonym of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ire}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 'to go,' but it is not easy \softline
always to disambiguate this use from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 girare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as 'to move in a circle,' which is by far the more usual \softline
usage in the poem (some 23 times).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   There is debate among commentators as to what exactly this sentence means.  It \softline
seems more likely that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ira}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ('wrath') referred to is the righteous anger of the forces of God \softline
(namely, the angel who is now approaching) rather than the wrath the travelers will encounter in \softline
the forces defending the City of Dis, as Boccaccio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.30-33) believes, or the \softline
'wrath' they must employ in order to enter the city (the view of most of the early commentators).  \softline
In the nineteenth century first Gregorio Di Siena (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.33, haltingly, and then, in a \softline
cogent exposition, Andrea Scartazzini (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.33), advanced the view that the 'wrath' in \softline
question is represented by the angel's assault upon the closed city.  That seems the most \softline
convincing reading.  Among modern discussants, see Casagrande's strong defense of the angelic \softline
hypothesis ("Dante e Filippo Argenti: riscontri patristici e note di critica testuale," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  51 [1978], pp. 233-35).  And for textual confirmation of this view see v. 106, below, \softline
where Virgil and Dante, after the angel's intervention, enter the city of Dis without further \softline
struggle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 38-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'The three Erinyes or Furies, Alecto, Megaera, and Tisiphone, who dwelt in the \softline
depths of Hell and punished men both in this world and after death' ("Erine," in Toynbee, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise \softline
Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 [1898]).  See Aeneid VI.570-575.  In Virgil, as in \softline
Greek myth, these three sisters are punishers of crimes of blood.  Dante sees them as the \softline
handmaids of Proserpina (or Hecate), the queen of hell.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Gorgon Medusa; she alone of the three Gorgons was mortal, and was at first a \softline
beautiful maiden, but, in consequence of her having given birth to two children by Poseidon in one \softline
of Athena's temples, the latter changed her hair into serpents, which gave her head such a fearful \softline
appearance that every one who looked upon it was turned into stone' (Toynbee, "Gorgon," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 [1898]).  See Ovid }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metamorphoses}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.606-V.249.  The Furies' threat to bring out their biggest defensive weapon remains unfulfilled only, we \softline
may assume, because of the rapid deployment of God's own siege-breaker, the angelic intercessor.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Furies lament that, when Theseus came to the nether regions with Perithous in \softline
order to rescue Proserpina (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.392-397), they only imprisoned him, rather than putting \softline
him to death, since that left him alive to be rescued by Hercules.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Gorgon, or Medusa's head, was, merely looked upon, powerful enough to \softline
turn a human onlooker to stone.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Vv. 61-63 contain the second address to the reader in the poem (see note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VIII.94-96).  This one has caused more difficulty than any other, and 'solutions' are so abundant \softline
that it is fair to say that none has won general consent, from the first commentators' exertions \softline
until today.  (For a discussion see Amilcare Iannucci, "Dottrina e allegoria in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII, 67 - \softline
IX, 105," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e le forme dell{\u8219\'27}allegoresi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. M. Picone [Ravenna: Longo, 1987], pp. 99-124.)  Opinions are divided, first of all, on whether the passage points back in the text, either \softline
primarily to Medusa (seen as despair, heresy, the hardened will, etc.) or to the Furies (seen as sin \softline
itself, or the three main categories of sin punished in hell [incontinence, violence, fraud], or \softline
remorse, etc.), or to a combination of these.  Those who believe that the passage invites the \softline
reader rather to look }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 forward}{\plain \fs24 \f1  than back are in accord that it refers to the avenging intruder who is 
about to appear in order to open the locked gates of Dis; but there is great debate over exactly \softline
what the one 'sent from heaven' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.85) signifies (see discussion in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.85).  \softline
Surely it seems more natural for the reference to point backwards to something already said.  And \softline
indeed something noteworthy and perhaps puzzling has just occurred: Virgil has covered Dante's \softline
eye-covering hands with his own hands as well.  If }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 this}{\plain \fs24 \f1  passage (vv. 58-60) is the one that \softline
contains a hidden doctrine (and few commentators believe it is, but see Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in \softline
Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969)] pp. 239-46), perhaps what it \softline
suggests is that stoic restraint is not enough to keep a sinner safe from dangerous temptation (i.e., \softline
Dante, had she appeared, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 would have}{\plain \fs24 \f1  looked upon Medusa and been turned to stone, just as \softline
Ulysses }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 would have}{\plain \fs24 \f1  listened to the Sirens and been destroyed by them had he not been restrained \softline
by other forces).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This splendidly energetic simile is perhaps built out of elements found in two \softline
similes in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.416-419 and XII.451-455).  In the first of these the Trojan forces mount \softline
an impetuous counter-attack upon the Greek invaders of their city; in the second the forces of \softline
Aeneas begin the eventually victorious final attack upon the armies of Turnus.  The celestial \softline
messenger, though only one in number, has the force of a great army; victory is seconds away.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Now Virgil can allow Dante to use his eyes once more: Medusa is apparently no \softline
longer a threat.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A number of commentators and translators have the frogs in this simile going to \softline
the bottom of the pond; they go to land (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 a la terra}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), as Dante says they do, and as any intelligent \softline
frog will do when a snake enters the water.  This simile probably derives from Ovid, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metamorphoses}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.370-381.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The angel walks upon the water in imitation of Christ (Matthew 14:25).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-83.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The angel resembles Mercury, as he is described by Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.1-11), \softline
coming back up from the foul air of the underworld with his caduceus in hand.  For a study of the \softline
various classical sources for this scene see David Quint's article ("Epic Tradition and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  93 [1975], pp. 201-7).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That this agent of good is 'sent from heaven' indicates clearly enough that he is an \softline
angel, although debate over his identity still continues.  See Silvio Pasquazi, 'Messo celeste' \softline
(ED.1971.3), pp. 919-21, making a strong case for his angelic status and giving a summary of the \softline
debate.  Pasquazi also argues for one traditional further identification, making the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 messo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
specifically the archangel Michael, who led the forces of the good angels against the rebellious \softline
ones in the war in heaven (Apoc. 12:7-9) -- see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.10-12 -- exactly the forces he \softline
now must combat once more in the netherworld.  (Pasquazi's final argument, that Michael dwells \softline
in Limbo, is probably simply unacceptable.)  Over the centuries there has been a continuing \softline
argument between those who believe that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 messo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is Mercury and those who believe that he is \softline
an angel, and, in some cases, specifically Michael.  It seems highly likely that Dante here gives us \softline
an archangel Michael 'dressed up' as Mercury, a fused identity that is not problematic in any way, \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 given Dante's practice of combining pagan and Christian materials. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab For a recent discussion that again confirms the most likely hypothesis, that this creature is \softline
indeed an angel from heaven, see Massimo Seriacopi, "Un riscontro testuale inedito per 'dal ciel \softline
messo' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX 85)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Publications of the Carla Rossi Academy Press (in Affiliation with the \softline
University of Connecticut [www.rossiacademy.uconn.edu]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 1999).  For a return to the central \softline
hypothesis of Pasquazi (Michael as Mercury), see Susanna Barsella ("The Mercurial \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 integumentum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the heavenly messenger [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX 79-103]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 \softline
[2003], pp. 371-95).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 86-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's command that Dante bow down before the angel removes just about any \softline
doubt about the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 messo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 's divine status.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 89-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The angel's opening of the barred gates with his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 verghetta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ('wand') is almost \softline
surely, even if there is no sign of recognition in the commentary tradition, modelled on Mercury's \softline
similar opening of the gates of Herse's chamber with his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 verga}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , i.e., his caduceus (Ovid, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
II.819).  See Hollander, "The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(Ravenna: Longo, 1980), p. 181n., and Barsella, "The Mercurial }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 integumentum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the heavenly \softline
messenger (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX 79-103)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 (2003), p. 386.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'outcasts of heaven' are undoubtedly the rebellious angels referred to in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 VIII.82-83, 'more than a thousand angels fallen from Heaven.'  See also the reference, a few lines \softline
earlier in this canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.79), to 'a thousand lost souls' who guard the city of Dis, that is, these \softline
very angels.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 93-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The angel makes clear, in his address to his fallen brethren, that resistance to the \softline
will of God is utterly useless.  His reference to the chaining of Cerberus by Hercules reflects \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.392-396.  Dante has now been associated with two classical heroes, Theseus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IX.54) and Hercules.  His powers, however, reside not in himself but in his heaven-ordained \softline
mission.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-103.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The angel's impassive attitude tells us something about the nature the \softline
inhabitants of hell that we sometimes forget: from God's perspective there is nothing worthy of \softline
attention in their plight.  The angel only wants to get out of this place as quickly as he can in order \softline
to return to eternal bliss, so much so that he has not even a word of greeting or support for the \softline
two travelers. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That Virgil and Dante now enter 'without further struggle' helps affirm that (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IX.33, Virgil's remark that 'now we cannot enter without wrath,' does not refer to the warring \softline
disposition of the travelers, but to that of the angel.  This whole passage, from the last verse of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.130) to now, the moment of successful entry of the walled city of Dis, \softline
narrates a military campaign: Virgil and Dante approach by sea in Phlegyas's military transport \softline
ship; the forces ranged against them signal their coming and prepare to do battle, closing the gates \softline
and assuming defensive positions on the battlements; they wheel up their main weapons, the \softline
Furies, who prepare to unleash their secret weapon, Medusa; the invading forces then deploy }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 their}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
secret weapon, the heavenly battering-ram that opens the gates and, in a trice, wins the battle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-115.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's references to two famous ancient Roman cemeteries, at Arles in France \softline
and Pola in Istria, build the scene for us: these grave sites are not mounds in the ground but \softline
sarchophagi, raised monuments of stone that contain the remains of the dead.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-131.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil explains to Dante that this sixth Circle of hell encloses many different \softline
heretical sects, each of which is punished in a separate sepulchre, and some of which are punished \softline
with more, others with less, severity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Why is heresy punished within the walls of Dis, where all the sins punished are sins of will, \softline
not those of appetite?  It is interesting to see how often early commentators associate heresy with \softline
obstinacy or obduracy; their word is the Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pertinax}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Some of them may be reflecting St. \softline
Thomas's definition (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 S.T}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II-II, q. 5, a. 3): if a man 'is not }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pertinacious}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in his disbelief, he is in that \softline
case no heretic, but only a man in error.'  See, among others, the commentaries of Boccaccio \softline
(comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.127 and to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.110-133), Benvenuto (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.112-116 and to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IX.127-129), Francesco da Buti (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.106-123 and to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.31-39), John of \softline
Serravalle (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.13-15); Daniello (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.133 [citing Thomas]) and, among \softline
the moderns, Poletto (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.28-30), Carroll (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.132).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The turnings to the right here and at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII.32 have caused puzzlement and \softline
some ingenuity.  In hell, whenever the direction of their movement is mentioned, Dante and Virgil \softline
elsewhere always head to the left.  Only on these two occasions do they move rightward.  These \softline
two rightward turnings occur just before the entrance to the sixth Circle, in which heresy is \softline
punished, and before the exit from the realm of Violence, the seventh Circle.  Some have \softline
welcomed the Scartazzini/Vandelli hypothesis (see that commentary to this passage) that both \softline
heresy and fraud are alike in their deformations of truth.  But this explanation fails to observe that \softline
treachery, punished in the ninth and last Circle, also deforms the truth, and that the second \softline
rightward turning takes place }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 before}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the travelers enter the realm of fraud, in any case.  Other less \softline
simple explanations have other difficulties associated with them.  This is another instance in which \softline
the commentary tradition has not resolved Dante's plan, if indeed there was one.  It is possible \softline
that the rightward movement at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 XVII.32 is only the necessary result of having to leave \softline
their circling movement in order to move toward Geryon, even if some maintain (e.g., Rossetti \softline
[comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.31-33]) that there is an allegorical meaning both in turning to the right to \softline
face fraud from 'the right side,' as it were, and in walking ten steps that reflect the ten }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolge}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of \softline
Fraud.  In any case, either of these explanations reduces the likelihood that there is a 'program' \softline
linking }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.132 and XVII.32.  And then the only 'program' would be one involving the sin \softline
of heresy.  For some reason Dante decided that its specialness, or perhaps extraneousness to the \softline
Aristotelian/Ciceronian divisions of vice, called for the retrograde and special movement.  But for \softline
a literal explanation of even this turning to the right, see Andreoli (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.132): 'Di \softline
cosiffatta eccezione io credo non si possa dare altra ragione che questa, che avendo dovuto i Poeti \softline
fare una grande aggirata (c. VIII, 79) per isbarcare alla porta di Dite, nell'entrarvi poi si trovassero \softline
aver gi{\f3 \'42} percorso pi{\f3 \'6a} della solita nona parte del cerchio; e che perci{\f3 \'62} questa volta, per trovare il \softline
punto prefisso alla loro traversata nel cerchio seguente, essi invece di procedere a sinistra \softline
avessero dovuto retrocedere a destra.'\par
}}