{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fswiss \fcharset0 \fprq2 Arial;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 08}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the first time the poet interrupts the chronological flow of his narrative, \softline
interpolating events that occurred before the situation described in the very last verse of the \softline
preceding canto (for a briefer but similar interpolation see the first tercet of the thirteenth canto).  \softline
The first 81 lines of canto VIII relate what occurred between the travelers' first experience of the \softline
wrathful sinners in the Styx (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.129) and their arrival at the foot of a tower of the walled city \softline
of Dis (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.130).  The self-conscious interruption of the narrative may be enough to account \softline
for the self-conscious opening verse: 'To continue, let me say....'  However, Boccaccio, in his \softline
commentary to this canto, was the first to sponsor the idea that in fact Dante only now, in \softline
Lunigiana in 1306, took up again the composition of his poem, begun in Florence before his exile \softline
and left behind when he could not return to the city.  According to Boccaccio, a friend brought \softline
him the text of the first seven cantos, which had lain fallow for some six or seven years.  While \softline
most do not credit this version of the history of composition of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , it has some support.  \softline
See Giovanni Ferretti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 I due tempi della composizione della "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bari: Laterza, \softline
1935]) and Giorgio Padoan (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il lungo cammino del "Poema sacro": studi danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: \softline
Olschki, 1993]).}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The latter's book is devoted to a reassessment of the problem of the \softline
compositional history of the entire poem.  In his view, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was composed between 1306 and \softline
1315, while most students of the problem argue for a completion of the first }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  around 1310.  \softline
For the identical phrasing of the mathematician Paolo dell'Abbaco (even if the phrase was \softline
probably common enough): 'Io dicho seghuitando,' see Vallone (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Percorsi danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le \softline
Lettere, 1991]), p. 75.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This mysterious signalling almost certainly refers to the defensive maneuvers of the \softline
demonic guardians of hell.  Perhaps the fires of the defenders of Dis atop this tower are a warning \softline
to those further along the wall -- or at least some think so.  Thus the two flames set out here \softline
would warn against a force of two enemies, and the answering flame would seem to acknowledge \softline
that warning.  Yet the primary purpose of the two flames would seem to be to summon Phlegyas \softline
(see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.19) to capture and deliver a soul into bondage.  (In this second \softline
interpretation, the twin flames do not necessarily indicate the number of interlopers.)  Such a view \softline
encourages some to believe that Minos hurls the wrathful into the Styx, whence they are retrieved \softline
and given proper station by Phlegyas, whose business in the muddy river is not to ferry souls \softline
across and into Dis, but to place them in the river, as Caretti ("Una Interpretazione Dantesca," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi e ricerche di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: La Nuova Italia, 1951], p. 6), believes.  That \softline
solution, however, would imply that the signals from the tower would be deployed each time a \softline
wrathful soul is sent down, and that seems improbable.  A possible way out is offered by the \softline
hypothesis that Phlegyas's function is to round up escaping wrathful souls should they attempt to \softline
flee the mud.  In such a case, the demons of Dis would assist a fellow demon to wreak pain upon \softline
the damned.  But then why do the demons signal other demons along the wall?  Or are the fires \softline
answered by still other demons at Phlegyas' 'boathouse'?  The details are sparse enough to make a \softline
final resolution next to impossible.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's three questions are not really answered by Virgil,  who does not say exactly \softline
what the twinned flame signifies, does not say at all what the second means in answer, and \softline
similarly ignores the question of agency with respect to the second flame.  He does imply that 
Phlegyas's skiff is what the custodians of the first flame summoned.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Padoan, in his commentary to this verse, points out that Phlegyas's skiff is not large, \softline
like Charon's, but small, an infernal speedboat, as it were, meant for the pursuit of individuals, not \softline
crowds of souls to be ferried across a river.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Phlegyas, who is not in the least interested in Virgil, would seem to believe that Dante \softline
is a condemned soul who is trying to escape.  As Padoan points out in his commentary to this \softline
verse, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 Dante elsewhere several times uses the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fello}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (here translated as 'damned') so as to \softline
associate it with wrath (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.132; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.72; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.15).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Phlegyas, son of Mars and King of Orchomenos in Boeotia, father of Ixion and \softline
Coronis; the latter having been violated by Apollo, by whom she became the mother of \softline
Aesculapius, Phlegyas in fury set fire to the temple of Apollo at Delphi, for which sacrilege he was \softline
slain by the god and condemned to eternal punishment in the lower world' (cited from the article \softline
"Flegias" in Paget Toynbee, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 [1898]).  In \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.618-620 he is mentioned by the Sibyl as now, in Tartarus, warning against such \softline
temerity against the gods.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 20-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's mocking response makes it seem likely that Phlegyas does at times \softline
intervene in the capture and punishment of damned souls, if not under what precise conditions he \softline
does so.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The brief simile establishes the fact that Phlegyas feels he has been tricked into \softline
thinking that he had been summoned to do his usual task.  As we have seen, exactly what that is \softline
remains something of a mystery.  Yet why would other demons have chosen to trick him?  Or is \softline
the reader to infer a divine plan behind his summons?  This last detail, like so many in this part of \softline
the narrative (vv. 3-24), raises more questions than it answers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the relation of this moment, so clearly modelled on Aeneas's stepping into \softline
Charon's skiff in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.413-414, to Dante's version of that scene at the close of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III, \softline
see thenote to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.136.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the first time in the poem that we hear an angry debate between the \softline
protagonist and one of the sinners.  These are often, as here, couched in a form reminiscent of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzoni}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , poems in the low language of street-wise insult, that were a popular pastime of \softline
thirteenth-century Italian poets, including Dante.  'Pure' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzoni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  were usually sonnets.  The second \softline
participant usually responded to the insults of the first with the same rhyme scheme (and often the \softline
identical rhyme words) deployed by the original attacker.  Dante's adaptation of the technique in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  reveals its roots in this form.  For an overview of the genre see Matteo Pedroni and \softline
Antonio St{\f2\u228\'e4}uble, eds., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il genere "tenzone" nelle letterature romanze delle origini}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Ravenna: \softline
Longo, 1999).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 32.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is Filippo Argenti; see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 VIII.61.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Gino Casagrande ("Dante e Filippo Argenti: riscontri patristici e note di critica \softline
testuale," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  51 [1978]), p. 249, cites a passage in Hugh of St. Victor to explain \softline
Dante's curse and Filippo's weeping: 'It is a misery to him who, bitter of mind because he cannot \softline
exact revenge upon his superior, must take satisfaction in his own tears.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   After Virgil thrusts Filippo Argenti (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.61) back into the \softline
Styx, fending off his attempted wrathful assault, he congratulates Dante for his harsh words to \softline
this sinner (vv. 37-39).  His words are reminiscent of those spoken of Christ in Luke 11:27: \softline
'Blessed is the womb that bore you.'  Sinclair cites a biblical text as being in concert with the spirit \softline
of the protagonist's righteous indignation here: 'Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate you....  I \softline
hate them with perfect hatred: I count them my enemies' (Palms 139:21-22).  While to most it \softline
seems that Virgil's approving words and Dante's righteous anger are entirely appropriate as the \softline
protagonist learns to harden himself against feeling either pity or fear when confronted by the \softline
damned, a minority has given voice to the doubt that we should read either Virgil as authoritative \softline
here or, indeed, Dante as being morally correct in his invective.  See, among others, Rocco \softline
Montano (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Storia della poesia di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. I [Naples: Quaderni di Delta, 1962]), pp. 418-21; J. \softline
Stephen Russell ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII: Dante's Anger and the Sins of Misreading," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Literary and \softline
Historical Perspectives of the Middle Ages: Proceedings of the 1981 SEMA Meeting}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. W. \softline
Cummins and others [Morgantown: West Virginia University Press, 1982], pp. 200-7); and \softline
Christopher Kleinhenz ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy", Introductory Readings, I: \softline
"Inferno,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. T. Wlassics [Charlottesville, Va.: University of Virginia, 1990]), pp. 101-4.  Such a \softline
view, if accepted, would make the reader's task a nearly impossible one.  If we cannot trust the \softline
text when both protagonist and guide are in full accord, when can we ever trust it?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Some read Filippo's pridefulness as being his 'real' sin, and not wrath.  Wrath is his \softline
besetting vice, but many others may come into play in him or in any sinner.  The notions that our \softline
disposition to sin must be unitary has no base either in medieval ethical treatises or in ordinary \softline
human experience.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   From the cries of others the reader finally learns the name of this sinner (Dante has \softline
known exactly who he is -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.39).  Filippo Argenti was a Black Guelph from a \softline
powerful Florentine family.  His real name was Filippo Adimari de' Cavicciuoli, but he supposedly \softline
was known as Filippo Argenti because he had his horse's hooves shod in silver (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 argento}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  A \softline
number of early commentators relate that his brother, Boccaccino, got hold of Dante's possessions \softline
when the poet was exiled.  If that is true, we have here a pretty clear case of authorial revenge \softline
upon a particularly hated enemy.  See Francesco Forti, 'Filippo Argenti' (ED.1970.2), pp. 873-76.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 62.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bizzarro}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , explains Boccaccio's comment to this passage, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 in Florentine \softline
vernacular is used of people who 'suddenly and for any reason at all lose their tempers.'  See also \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 VII.109-114.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Benvenuto da Imola's commentary to this verse has it that Filippo gnaws himself 'just \softline
as a proud man will do, unable to avenge the injury done him by someone more powerful.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 68.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dis (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dite}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), for the Romans another name for Pluto, god of the underworld, for Dante 
is thereby another name for Lucifer or Satan.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The most visible buildings of this city, seen from afar, are mosques (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 meschite}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), thus \softline
associating them with what was for Dante and his era a most hostile religious and military force, \softline
the Mohammedans.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The iron walls of the City of Dis are emblematic of the fact that from here on down all \softline
sins punished are the result of the hardened will, not the whims of appetite.  Virgil's Tartarus, into \softline
which Aeneas does not penetrate (the Sibyl describes to him its contents) has an iron tower (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VI.554: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ferrea turris}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) that may be remembered here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Only here and now do we arrive at the place we left in the final verse of the last canto, \softline
under a tower of the City of Dis.  See Musa's observation (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Advent at the Gates}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bloomington, IN: \softline
Indiana University Press, 1974]), p. 81.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-85.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first 'citizens' of Dis whom we see are the rebel angels who were defeated, \softline
along with Satan, by Michael and his angels.  For the first time Virgil will have to deal with \softline
adversaries who are not easily swayed.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the first of seven addresses to the reader in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Dante's frequent \softline
insistence on the presence of a reader is itself noteworthy.  Perhaps no other literary text contains \softline
as many cases of direct address to its readership.  The net effect is to forge a relationship between \softline
us and the author that makes us partners in his enterprise.  His most usual tactic is to ask us to \softline
share in the strong emotions he experienced at any given moment; on other occasions he invites us \softline
to interpret things difficult to understand.  In all cases we feel drawn into the poem, as though we \softline
were witnessing what the poet describes ourselves or being asked to share with him the difficulty \softline
of interpreting his materials.  See discussions in Gmelin ("Die Anrede an den Leser in der \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 G{\f2\u246\'f6}ttlichen Kom{\f2\u246\'f6}die}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Deutsches Dante-Jahrbuch}{\plain \fs24 \f1  30 [1951], pp. 130-40); Auerbach ("Dante's \softline
Addresses to the Reader," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Romance Philology}{\plain \fs24 \f1  7 [1954], pp. 268-78); and Spitzer ("The \softline
Addresses to the Reader in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  32 [1955]. pp. 143-66).  And see the article of \softline
Vittorio Russo, 'appello al lettore' (ED.1970.1), pp.324-26), for a listing: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.94-96; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IX.61-63; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.127-132; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.19-24; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.118; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXV.46-48; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.22-27; \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.19-21; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.70-72; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.106-111; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.1-9; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.97-105; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXXI.124-126; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.136-138; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.1-18; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.109-114; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.7-27; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.1-21; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.106-111.  Thus there are seven in each of the first two }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and at least five in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  However, and as Russo points out, there may be seven in the third }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as well, \softline
since the passage at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.10-12 may also be included and that at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.7-27 perhaps should \softline
be seen as two separate addresses (vv. 7-15 and 22-27).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The addresses are a sub-group of the classical rhetorical figure of apostrophe (direct \softline
address), which is amply used by this poet.  For discussion see the article 'apostrofe' by Francesco \softline
Tateo (ED.1970.1), pp. 319-21.  Another subdivision of apostrophe in addition to addressing \softline
one's reader is found in the invocations of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 II.7-9.  There are \softline
nine of these in the poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In their commentary to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 VIII.97 Casini/Barbi insist that, on the model of 
several biblical passages (e.g., the just man who falls seven times, rising again each time, of \softline
Proverbs 24:16), the 'seven times' is to be taken as indeterminate.  They go on to list eight times \softline
that Virgil has come to Dante's aid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.49, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.130, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.94, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.21, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.22, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VII.8, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.19, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.41).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 104-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's reassurance of an understandably shaken Dante, given the strength of \softline
opposition from the fallen angels, relies on the promise of divine support made to him, apparently, \softline
by Beatrice in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the first time in his role as guide, Virgil suffers defeat in an attempt to gain \softline
Dante access to the next stage of the journey.  Once again the reader understands that the forces \softline
of Dis, schooled in guile and strong of will, are far more stubborn adversaries than those \softline
encountered before.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil joins his frustration to what hopes he can develop in order to encourage \softline
Dante.  His main evidence for believing that he will be able to continue is drawn from his witness \softline
of the Harrowing of Hell, of which he gave notice in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.52-63.  J. S. Carroll, in his \softline
comment }{\plain \fs24 \f1 to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.1-9, looks ahead to these verses and cites the apocryphal Gospel of \softline
Nicodemus, chapters 13-19, in which the hosts of Hell attempted to block Christ's harrowing as \softline
source for the attempt of these new rebels to keep Virgil out of their kingdom.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'deadly writing' over the gate of hell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.1-9) is so, in the words of \softline
Casini/Barbi on this verse, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 because it tells the damned where they are headed -- into eternal death.  \softline
Thus the writing itself is very much 'alive,' but it speaks of death.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 128-130.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The nature of this descending messenger will be discussed in the notes to the \softline
following canto.  Musa (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Advent at the Gates}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1974]), \softline
p. 150, argues that this descent should put us in mind of the descent of the prophesied }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nova \softline
progenies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (new race) of Virgil's fourth Eclogue (verse 7).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab How does Virgil know that such aid is coming?  Some argue that he 'sees' it in his mind; \softline
others that Beatrice had promised exactly such help if ever it were needed when she spoke to \softline
Virgil in Limbo (in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II).  The text offers confirmation to neither notion, if the latter seems the \softline
more probable.\par
}}