{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 06}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   His consciousness returned after his swoon, Dante begins to investigate his new \softline
surroundings.  Once again we are not told how he moved (or was moved) from one Circle to the \softline
next, from Lust to Gluttony.  However, unlike the situation that pertained in the commentaries in \softline
response to the questions raised about the means of his crossing Acheron, the undescribed \softline
transport here has not caused debate, nor even any particular interest.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the Ovidian source of the phrase 'Al tornar de la mente' (With my returning senses) \softline
see Francesco Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto VI dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le \softline
Monnier, 1967), p. 19: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.531, 'Ubi mens rediit,' cited along with Brunetto Latini, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , verse 191, 'Ma tornando a la mente....'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  }{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 2.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As many commentators now point out, the technical word for 'in-laws' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cognati}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) used \softline
here reminds the reader who has become caught up in Francesca's words (as was the protagonist) \softline
that her adultery was particularly sinful, since she was engaged in it with her brother-in-law.  \softline
Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto VI dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le Monnier, 1967), p. \softline
19, points out that in the third book of Andreas Cappellanus' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De amore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  love between in-laws was \softline
considered incestuous.  See also Andr{\f2\u233\'e9} P{\f2\u233\'e9}zard, ed., Dante Alighieri, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Oeuvres compl{\f3 \'50}tes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Paris: \softline
Gallimard, 1965), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ad loc}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ., who cites a passage in Ovid for the resonance of a similar thought: \softline
'cognato poterit nomine culpa tegi' (by the name of kinsman the fault may be hidden -- Ovid, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Heroides}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.138 [Phaedra's words to Hippolytus]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Robert Dombrowski, "The Grain of Hell: A Note on Retribution in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  88 (1970), pp. 103-8. for the notion that the hellish downpour takes its central and \softline
antithetic model from the manna promised by God to Moses in the Bible (Exodus 16:4): 'Ecce \softline
ego pluam vobis panes de caelo' (Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-14.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For Virgil's description of Cerberus see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.417-418.  Dante's version of \softline
the mythological creature is unique in its inclusion of human attributes.  For the possible influence \softline
of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Roman d'En{\f2\u233\'e9}as}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vv. 2561-89, on Dante's conception of Cerberus, see Barbara Spaggiari, \softline
"Antecedenti e modelli tipologici nella letteratura in lingua d'o{\f3 \'56}l," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 I "monstra" nell'"Inferno" \softline
dantesco: tradizione e simbologie}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Spoleto: Centro italiano di studi sull'alto medioevo, 1997), pp. \softline
119-20.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a strong argument that would replace in this verse }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 barba}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (beard) with }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bocca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(mouth) see Federico Sanguineti, "Per }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI 16," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi e problemi di critica testuale}{\plain \fs24 \f1  59 (l999), \softline
pp. 43-46.  And for his presentation of arguments for a new }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stemma codicum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the manuscripts \softline
of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see his earlier article, "Prolegomeni all'edizione critica della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comed{\f3 \'58}a," }{\plain \fs24 \f1 in Leonella \softline
Coglievina and Domenico De Robertis, eds., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sotto il segno di Dante: scritti in onore di \softline
Francesco Mazzoni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le Lettere, 1998), pp. 261-82.  Now, of course, see the result of \softline
that investigation, Sanguineti{\u8219\'27}s edition of the poem, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dantis Alagherii Comedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: \softline
Edizioni del Galluzzo, 2001).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), pp. 264-65, made a \softline
strong case for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 iscoia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (and not }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ingoia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a reading found in most of the MSS, and most recently 
embraced by Lanza [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Commed{\f3 \'58}a: Testo critico secondo i pi{\f3 \'6a} antichi manoscritti fiorentini}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
Nuova edizione (Anzio: De Rubeis, 1996)], p. 52, the last element in the preceding verse points \softline
specifically to the 'taloned hands' of Cerberus, and this verse then describes what he does with \softline
these extremities: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 graffia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (claws), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 iscoia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (flays), and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 isquatra}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (quarters).  That seems entirely \softline
sensible.  Further, against the surprising (to say the least) reading }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ingoia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (swallows), which, \softline
despite its unreasonableness, has always found some believers, Barbi points out that (1) the \softline
sequence 'claws... swallows... quarters' would verge on the ridiculous, (2) Cerberus has already \softline
been described (v. 14) as barking with his three gullets, a sound that we are led to believe is \softline
continual and that would need to be interrupted by any such 'swallowing,' (3) the text makes no \softline
mention of his eating or otherwise mouthing the damned, an action that would clearly then have \softline
been meant to be part of their punishment, and Dante tends to be precise in such details.  \softline
Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Introduzione, pp. 172-73; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Commedia \softline
secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , p. 97) follows Barbi, also pointing out that the somewhat \softline
unusual word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 iscoia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  would have easily been transformed by an early copyist into }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ingoia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , with }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sc}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
being written as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ng}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto VI dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le \softline
Monnier, 1967]), p. 25, is also in this camp.  The debate over this word offers a good illustration \softline
of the importance (and justness) of the view of the minority, at least on frequent occasion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.21) for the association of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 profanus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (used \softline
here for the only time in the poem) specifically with gluttony, as found in the Bible (Hebrews \softline
12:16 [the 'profanity' of Esau in selling his birthright for food]) and in Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.840 \softline
[Erysichthon's 'profane' self-directed hunger, referred to by Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII.25-27]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Torraca (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.23-24) for what seems to be the first reference to a \softline
probable source for this verse in Arnaut Daniel's sestina }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il ferm voler}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , v. 10: 'Non ho membro, che \softline
non mi frema' (not a limb of mine is not a-tremble).  The context is of course very different: love, \softline
not rage, is causing Arnaut's trembling.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'sop' to Cerberus, in Virgil a honeyed cake (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.419-422), here becomes \softline
mere earth (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 terra}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Christopher Kleinhenz ("Infernal Guardians Revisited: 'Cerbero, il gran vermo' \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI, 22]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  93 [1975]), p. 190, has pointed out that Dante's strategic \softline
redoing of Virgil has its biblical resonance, as God's malediciton of the serpent (Genesis 3:14) \softline
concludes '... }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 terram}{\plain \fs24 \f1  comedes cunctis diebus vitae tuae' (and dust shall you eat all the days of your \softline
life).  The serpent's punishment for having urged Eve to eat the fruit of the tree is himself to eat \softline
the dead earth; his punishment is shared now by Cerberus.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-32.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the only simile found in this, the shortest canto we have yet read (only \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI will have so few verses -- 115).  The distribution of canto lengths throughout the \softline
poem would seem to indicate that Dante originally was limiting himself to composing in shorter \softline
units than he would generally employ later in his text.  If we examine the first twenty cantos we \softline
find that fourteen, or 70% of them, are 136 lines long or fewer (115 to 136), while 9 (or 11%) of \softline
the final eighty are in this group (and all of these between 130 and 136 lines).  Confining ourselves \softline
to the very shorterst cantos (those from 115 to 130 verses), we find that these occur six times in \softline
the first twenty cantos, with only one (of 130 lines) in this shorter group occurring after }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XX.  Of the eighty final cantos, 88.75% (71 of them) are between 139 and 160 lines long; only 
11.25% (9 cantos) of the final eighty are 136 lines or fewer.  See Joan Ferrante ("A Poetics of \softline
Chaos and Harmony," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Cambridge Companion to Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. R. Jacoff [Cambridge: \softline
Cambridge University Press, 1993]), pp. 154-55, for the distribution of Dante's canto lengths.  \softline
Such data surely make it seem that Dante was experimenting with this distribution as he \softline
progressed, a tentative conclusion that would cast some doubt on the position of Thomas Hart, \softline
who has argued, carefully and well, that it seems plausible that Dante may have planned even \softline
these details from the very beginning.  For a summary of his copious and interesting work, \softline
affording an overview of it, see Hart, "'Per misurar lo cerchio' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII 134) and \softline
Archimedes' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De mensura circuli}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Some Thoughts on Approximations to the Value of Pi," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la scienza}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Boyde and V. Russo (Ravenna: Longo, 1995), pp. 265-335.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is as though Dante had begun paring his art, striving for succinctness more than he had \softline
before.  Up to now, we have found similes an important structuring device in the first two cantos \softline
(see discussion in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.127-130), in the third canto (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.112-120), \softline
and in the fifth (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.40-49; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.82-85).  Only the fourth, given over nearly entirely to \softline
conversation about the nature of the Limbus and to a catalogue of the forty souls identified as \softline
being there, is without a simile (although it does contain a dramatic simple comparison [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IV.96]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Mirroring the low-mimetic tone of this canto, this its only simile for the first time turns to \softline
what we might refer to as 'scenes from daily life,' those wonderfully realistic touches that reveal \softline
what an intense and skilled observer Dante was of such scenes.  Many later similes in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  will \softline
also reveal this trait.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Boccaccio (comm. to}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.7-12) sees the bellowing of Cerberus (verse 32) as antithetic \softline
to the music played at banquets, the setting in the world above for the gluttony that is punished \softline
here.  Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.32) points out that this description of the effect on the guilty \softline
souls of Cerberus's barking mirrors the verse in Virgil describing a similar effect: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.401.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In hell, we are given to understand, matter and bodies can interact, but not matter \softline
and shades.  Accordingly, we might expect Dante to be soaked and chilled by the awful rain, while \softline
the shades of the gluttons feel nothing.  Instead, in a single }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 terzina}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the poet forces us to make \softline
two allowances: Dante, walking through the rain that strikes the sinners, apparently feels nothing \softline
of it.  The sinners, of course, feel it all too well.  We are reminded again that the physical laws of \softline
the afterworld are immutable -- except when the writer chooses to break them in order to make \softline
the details of his poem work better.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the Virgilian provenance of v. 36 see Padoan (comm. to}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.36):}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Aeneid }{\plain \fs24 \f1 VI.292-293; VI.700-702.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the first (but not the last) time in the poem Dante is recognized by one of the \softline
dead souls.  This moment introduces the Florentine 'subtext' of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Ciacco (as we shall \softline
learn to call this figure at v. 52) is the first of some three dozen Florentine characters found in the \softline
poem, the vast majority of them in hell.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As Padoan points out (comm. to}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.43), even those on their way to salvation, \softline
purging their former gluttony, are so changed in their facial expressions that Dante cannot \softline
recognize an old friend: Forese Donati in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.43.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The metaphor of a sack out of which the contents spill introduces the main theme \softline
of the canto, not gluttony, but political rivalry (even if the image itself relates to the over-abundant storage of food).  Many commentators try to find reasons to explain Dante's having \softline
related the two, but none has found a genuinely convincing link.  Until now, each group of \softline
sinners, the neutrals, the virtuous pagans, the lustful, has been portrayed essentially and mainly as \softline
we might expect; that is, all sinners in each group seem to be expressing their sins on earth in \softline
everything that they do or say.  Dante, however, chose not to keep to such a scheme on a regular \softline
basis and obviously decided to introduce 'sub-categories,' as it were, in certain Circles (e.g., \softline
politics [again] in the Circle of heresy).  It is hard to see any necessary connection between \softline
gluttony and politics, if one can find certain justifications, if one looks hard enough.  The fact is, \softline
Dante wants to address certain concerns and brings them to his text when he wants to.  For a \softline
study of Dante's 'digressions,' especially in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see Sergio Corsi, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il "modus digressivus" \softline
nella "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Potomac, Md.: Scripta humanistica, 1987).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The envy that Dante sees as the source of the terrible political rivalries in Florence in 1300 \softline
is traditionally understood as that felt by the nobler but poorer Donati faction of the Guelphs \softline
against the richer Cerchi faction.  Yet, and given both the political situation and the main meaning \softline
of envy in Dante's understanding (e.g., the desire to see one's opponents suffer loss), it seems \softline
clear that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 all}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Florentines are marked by this sin in Dante's eyes.  Envy, seen in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.111 as the \softline
motive force behind Satan's seduction of Eve, is the second worst (after pride) of the seven mortal \softline
sins.  In our time we tend not to understand either its gravity nor its widespread hold on human \softline
hearts.  An envious person does not want another's wealth or happiness so much as he wishes his \softline
neighbor to be deprived of wealth or happiness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the Virgilian source of Dante's happy life of those on earth (verse 51), as cited by \softline
Lombardi (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.51), see the phrase in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.428, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dulcis vitae}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  And, for a \softline
consideration of the way in which Ciacco's reference to Florence as being }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's}{\plain \fs24 \f1  city may \softline
suggest his own distance from citizenship, both temporally and morally (i.e., Ciacco's Florence, in \softline
'the good old days,' was a better place than it is now), see Romano Manescalchi, "'La tua citt{\f3 \'42}' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI, 49),"  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Electronic Bulletin of the Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (August 2002).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Dice lo spirito }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Voi cittadini mi chiamaste}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , per dire: in vita, fra voi, ero conosciuto col \softline
nome di Ciacco.  Ora che {\f3 \'50} fra gli }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 altri ciechi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , gli pare d'aver tutto perduto, anche il nome' (The \softline
spirit says, 'You my townsmen called me,' in order to say, 'in life, when I was among you, I was \softline
known by the name of Ciacco.'  Now that he is among his 'blind companions' [v. 93] it seems to \softline
him that he has lost everything, including his name).  This is the gloss of Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Problemi di \softline
critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), p. 205.  One of the most debated questions of this \softline
canto has to do with the identity and the name of this character.  Was his name actually 'Ciacco'?  \softline
If it was, an enduring supposition is that of Isidoro Del Lungo (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.52): he is the \softline
thirteenth-century Florentine poet Ciacco dell'Anguillara.  While such a solution is attractive, \softline
there is as yet not a shred of evidence to support it.  A more likely hypothesis is that his name was \softline
a nickname, granted him either because of his gluttonous habits ('ciacco' was a noun that in \softline
Tuscany meant 'pig,' or 'hog,' according to some fourteenth-century commentators, most notably \softline
Francesco da Buti [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.52], but none of the earliest report that this was the case and \softline
there is no other confirming record) or because his physiognomy was such as to call for such a \softline
name (i.e., his nose was flattened on his face -- Andr{\f2\u233\'e9} P{\f2\u233\'e9}zard, ED.1970.1, p. 983b).  And there is \softline
the further possibility that the nickname suggested no reference to offensive traits (Mazzoni points 
out that there are many examples in public documents of the time in which such names are used as \softline
Christian names [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto VI dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le Monnier, \softline
1967),  p. 36]).  The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Chiose selmiani}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.52) have it that Ciacco was a Florentine \softline
banker who ate and drank so much that his eyesight went bad -- as a result he could not count \softline
money and people made fun of him; he knew Dante, and died before Dante turned fourteen.  That \softline
is the most detailed and specific account we find in any early commentator.  What perhaps makes \softline
it most attractive is that Dante is perhaps referring to this poor eyesight in the detail about \softline
Ciacco's glance in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.91 (but see the note to that passage): Boccaccio's reference to Ciacco \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Decameron}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.viii.4), on the other hand, would suggest that he, too, read Dante's phrasing ('Voi \softline
cittadini mi chiamaste Ciacco') as indicating that this man had a different name but that the \softline
Florentines called him by his nickname: 'essendo in Firenze uno da tutti chiamato Ciacco' (there \softline
being in Florence a man who was called 'Ciacco' by everyone).  For a recent review of the entire \softline
problem, opting for the porcine nickname on the basis of Isidore of Seville's discussion of \softline
Epicureans as pigs, see Simone Marchesi's article ("'Epicuri de grege porcus': Ciacco, Epicurus \softline
and Isidore of Seville," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  117 [1999], pp. 117-31).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-61.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's response to Ciacco's laconic words is courteous.  However, as was not the \softline
case when he spoke with Francesca, he now quickly moves on to other things, the condition of \softline
Florence: 'what shall be the fate / of the citizens within the riven city?'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 62.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Our translation, 'Are any in it just?', is an interpretation, one shared by the \softline
overwhelming majority of commentators and translators.  If Mazzoni is correct in his \softline
interpretation of v. 73, perhaps the translation should run, 'Is there any justice in it?'  That would \softline
be consistent with his interpretation of the later line (if he himself treats the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giusto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here as an \softline
adjective).  See discussion in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.73.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the first prophecy about events that will have importance in Dante's own \softline
life (as opposed to the 'world-historical' prophecies that concern Dante as part of the human \softline
family [see the note to}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.98-105]) in a poem that is studded with them.  For the 'personal \softline
prophecies' in the poem see Emilio Pasquini, "Il }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  e una nuova idea di figuralismo," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Intersezioni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  16 (1996), p. 419: Ciacco's, Farinata's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.79-81); Brunetto's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.55-57); \softline
Vanni Fucci's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.143-150); Currado Malaspina's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.133-139); Oderisi's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XI.139-141); Bonagiunta's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.37-38); Forese's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.82-90); and, ninth and \softline
last, Cacciaguida's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.46-93).  Ciacco's is concerned with the events of May 1300, three \softline
or five weeks after the date of the journey, and thus events genuinely near at hand.  The White \softline
faction, led by the Cerchi family, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 selvaggia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the sense that its members come from the wooded \softline
outskirts of the city, will drive out the Black faction in 1300.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Within three years (in fact in 1302) the White faction will fall as the Blacks return \softline
to the city through the treachery of Pope Boniface VIII, who currently takes no action to help the \softline
city.  Mazzoni points out that all the three line-concluding verbs in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 terzina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  are drawn from the \softline
action of scales: one tray goes down while another comes up, while Boniface hangs in the balance \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto VI dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1967], p. 40).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a brief but strong reading of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 due giusti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as referring to Dante and another 
Florentine, identity not knowable, see Barbi, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Sansoni, \softline
1934), p. 266.  Currently a great debate rages over this verse, fanned by the exertions of Mazzoni.  \softline
His first findings (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto VI dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le \softline
Monnier, 1967], pp. 40-46) have now been reiterated several times, most recently in "Tematiche \softline
politiche fra Guittone e Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Guittone d'Arezzo nel settimo centenario della morte: Atti del \softline
Convegno Internazionale di Arezzo (22-24 aprile 1994)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. M. Picone (Florence: Franco Cesati, \softline
1995), pp. 351-83.  (Mazzoni, as of his notice to this writer in August 1998, is preparing still \softline
another study of the question.)  Following Pietro di Dante (Pietro1 to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.73), who argues \softline
that the phrase refers not to two human beings, but to two }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 laws}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , natural and posited, Mazzoni \softline
argues that the source for such an interpretation exists in St. Thomas's commentary on a passage \softline
in Aristotle's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ethics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VIII, c. xv, 1243): 'Duplex est iustum' (Justice is twofold), that is, natural \softline
and posited.  Perhaps even more helpful to Mazzoni's case is Dante's own phrasing in his epistle \softline
against his fellow townsmen (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.5), whom he accuses of transgressing laws both divine \softline
and man-made ('Vos autem }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 divina iura et humana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  transgredientes').  The traditional reading of \softline
the verse, which has gathered massive support, is as we have translated it: 'Two men are just and \softline
are not heeded there.'  Mazzoni's 'translation' would read, in English, 'the two kinds of justice are \softline
not followed there.'  Mazzoni has also demonstrated that Dante uses the Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 intendere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the \softline
sense he claims it has here ('followed') in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.v.1).  One can see both the force and the \softline
charm of his argument.  It is a possible line of interpretation.  But it eventually fails to convince \softline
for a fairly simple reason, namely, that both locutions are, to say the least, strange in Dante's \softline
vernacular, since each of them would be unique, unusual meanings of often used and common \softline
words (see Zygmunt Baranski, "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.73: A Controversy Re-examined," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  36 \softline
[1981],  p. 8).  Baranski's article contains a frontal attack on Mazzoni's position, which had been \softline
supported by Pietro Caligaris ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI, 73-75," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  14 [1973], pp. 51-52) and then \softline
attacked by Steno Vazzana ("Ancora su }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  15 [1974], pp. 41-44).  It has \softline
been reprinted in an Italian translation: "'Giusti son due' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ., VI, 73): tra Sodoma e Firenze," in \softline
Baranski{\u8219\'27}s }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 "Sole nuovo, luce nuova": Saggi sul rinnovamento culturale in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Turin: \softline
Scriptorium, 1996), pp. 183-219.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In the view of this writer, Mazzoni's position is most vulnerable because it has left intact \softline
the usual interpretation of v. 62, 's'alcun v'{\f3 \'50} giusto' (Are any in it just?) -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto VI \softline
dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le Monnier, 1967), p. 40, where he admits \softline
that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giusto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is adjectival, and refers to the 'presenza di uomini giusti' (the presence of just men -- p. \softline
41) in Florence.  If that is true, his adventurous reading of v. 73 seems doomed.  For that verse, as \softline
many commentators in our century have pointed out, echoes biblical texts in which the salvation \softline
of a city may depend on the finding of a handful or fewer of just men in it, most prominently in \softline
Genesis18:23-33.  And if the first use of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giusto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in Dante's question is adjectival, then the second \softline
use, in Ciacco's answer, must almost certainly be so too.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It should be noted that, among the early commentators, not only that Pietro is alone in this \softline
interpretation, although Iacopo della Lana had previously offered a not dissimilar one (comm. to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.73), but that he is adamantly opposed in it by John of Serravalle, who begins his remarks \softline
with this slighting flourish: 'filius Dantis, volens hic glossare patrem, dicit multa minus bene dicta \softline
et minus vera' (Dante's son, desiring to write a gloss on this passage of his father's, says many \softline
things less than well and less than true).  He then goes on to point out two other errors in Pietro's \softline
gloss before insisting that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 due giusti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  refer to Dante himself and Guido Cavalcanti (comm. to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.64-69).  This was the solution of many of the commentators until the nineteenth century, 
when Andreoli (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.73) switched the second name, substituting that of Dino \softline
Compagni.  Given Dante's troubled relationship with Guido at this time, that is probably a wise \softline
choice.  On the other hand, it is probably best to avoid any attribution at all, if we cannot but think \softline
that, if Dante is thinking of two (or a few) just citizens, he certainly is referring to himself (Barbi's \softline
position, with which we began).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 74-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See the similar remark offered by Brunetto Latini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.68).  For Florence to \softline
be afflicted by pride, envy, and avarice is to be afflicted by the worst of the seven mortal sins, at \softline
least as far as Dante's unofficial view would have it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   If there are only two just Florentines in the city in 1300, in 'the good old days' \softline
there seem to have been at least five, men who made great effort to offer sustenance to goodness.  \softline
The meaning of the tercet is clear enough.  The problem arises because one of the five, Arrigo, is \softline
never mentioned -- or surely does not seem to be.  The other four are seen in Hell, Farinata in \softline
canto X, among the heretics, Tegghiaio and Iacopo in XVI, among the Florentine homosexual \softline
politicians (the most positively presented sinners since those we met in Limbo), and Mosca, in a \softline
sense the only 'surprise' here, since he is punished in canto XXVIII for his treachery on the \softline
battlefield, but, in Dante's mind, is praiseworthy for his efforts to bring peace to the city before \softline
that.  See the study of Pietro Santini ("Sui fiorentini 'che fur s{\f3 \'58} degni,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1923], \softline
pp. 25-44) for this argument, which is espoused by Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto VI dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove \softline
letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1967]), pp. 46-48.  Of course, it is the puzzle created by \softline
Arrigo's not being further referred to in hell that has drawn commentators like flies to rotten meat.  \softline
For a review of the many competing 'Harrys' who began to populate the margins of Dante's poem \softline
in the fourteenth century and have continued to do so into our own, see Vincenzo Presta, 'Arrigo' \softline
(ED.1970.1), pp. 391-92.  Presta prefers the candidacy, first advanced by Santini, of one Arrigo \softline
di Cascia, as does Mazzoni, p. 47.  All one can say is that it is strange that Dante picked the \softline
names of five men, four of whom he goes on to include prominently in his poem, and one that he \softline
does not mention again -- especially since he has Ciacco say explicitly that the protagonist will see \softline
all of them in his descent (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.87).  This is a mystery that will probably always remain a \softline
mystery.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The world of the living is almost always characterized as being filled with the light of \softline
the sun, as 'sweet,' when it is remembered by the damned in their bitter darkness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A sixteenth-century commentator, Castelvetro (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.90) paraphrases this \softline
line as follows: 'it has been conceded me by God to make clear to you what I have revealed, at \softline
your insistence, but, as for the future, I say no more either to you or to anyone else until the Day \softline
of Judgment.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ciacco's last 'gesture,' his glance moving from Dante's face and going vacant, has \softline
been a puzzle to many readers.  The commentary of Bosco/Reggio is clear and to the point: \softline
'Ciacco passes from his temporarily fully-human phase to one of nearly pure animality; first he \softline
looks askance; then he continues to fix Dante with a stunned gaze in which, bit by bit, any last \softline
trace of humanity is extinguished; then his head droops, deprived of any human vitality; finally he \softline
falls headfirst into the muck, unfeeling and inert' (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.91-93).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab For Ciacco's being in a state of 'hebetude,' the condition that theologians connect with \softline
gluttony, see Singleton (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.91-93).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Padoan's gloss (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.92) suggests that for Ciacco this experience is akin to \softline
that of a second death.  Indeed, we see him arise from death, called back to his vital former self \softline
when he hears his native speech; now he 'dies' all over again.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Despite the argument of P{\f2\u233\'e9}zard ("Ce qui gronde en l'{\f2\u233\'e9}ternel [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI, 94-115]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  42 [1965]), pp. 211-14, that the 'enemy' is not Christ (who is no one's 'enemy'), but \softline
damnation, almost all understand that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 podesta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  does indeed refer to Christ when He shall come \softline
in Judgment.  Padoan points out (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.96) that at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.16 Dante refers to God as \softline
'l'avversario d'ogne male' (the adversary of all evil).  P{\f2\u233\'e9}zard's theology is not reliable here: divinity, \softline
it is true, is not the enemy of the living, but loves them all; the unrepentant sinners in hell are \softline
another matter.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In the opinion of Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.99), 'the judgment that \softline
eternally resounds' has a biblical source, the words of Christ, 'Discedite a me, maledicti, in ignem \softline
aeternum' (Depart from me, you cursed ones, into everlasting fire -- Matthew 25:41).  For the \softline
resonance here of the angelic trumpet blast that will herald the Last Judgment see Singleton \softline
(comm. to}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.94-99, citing I Corinthians 15:51-53).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For all the interest shown in the present situation of Florence in this canto, it is clear \softline
that the future of the damned is to be understood as having greater eventual importance.  This, at \softline
least, is Dante's 'official' position.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Reviewing a certain confusion among recent commentators about the precise \softline
citation made here, Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto VI dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le \softline
Monnier, 1967]), p. 50, shows that this tercet derives from a passage in St. Thomas's commentary \softline
to Aristotle's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De anima}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : 'quanto anima est perfectior, tanto exercet plures perfectas operationes et \softline
diversas' (as the soul becomes more perfect, so it is more perfect in its several operations).  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La tua \softline
sc{\f3 \'56}enza}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is thus Aristotle's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De anima}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and not the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Physics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  or the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ethics}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as some have argued.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The notion of a greater 'perfection' for the damned suggests only that, since a \softline
soul united with its body is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ipso facto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  better than a soul alone, the ontological nature of the \softline
damned will be improved by the restoration of their bodies that will follow the Last Judgment.  \softline
(For St. Thomas on this doctrine see Singleton [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.106-107].)  However, and \softline
thoroughly in accord with the penal code of hell, this 'improvement' in their condition will only \softline
result in their ability to feel more pain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 113.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's self-conscious gesture as narrator seems to have no hidden reference, such \softline
as many believe is found in an earlier similar moment of narrative reticence (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IV.104-105).  This would rather seem to be a 'realistic detail,' the narrator insisting that his task is \softline
also that of editor, that he had gathered much more 'material' than he can report.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Where Christ is the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nimica podesta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (hostile Power) who will oppress the damned at \softline
the Last Judgment (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.96), here the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gran nemico}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (great foe) is Plutus, the classical god of 
wealth (and not Pluto, the classical god of the underworld).  As we shall see, the hellish kingdom \softline
over which he presides contains the avaricious and the prodigal.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the notion of the desire for riches as being a 'root sin' (along with Pride) in the \softline
Christian view of such things, see the frequently cited words of St. Paul, 'Radix malorum est \softline
cupiditas' (For the love of money is the root of all evil -- [I Timothy 6:10]).\par
}}