{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier;}{\f1\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f2\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f4\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\s1 \f1 QuickFormat1;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 INFERNO CANTO 01}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 \ul0 \tab 1.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The first of the 14,233 lines that constitute the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f2  immediately establishes a \softline
context for the poem that is both universal and particular.  It also immediately compels a reader to \softline
realize that this is a difficult text, one that may not be read passively, but must be 'interpreted.'  \softline
And the exegetical tradition that has grown upon (and sometimes over) the text is so responsive \softline
to these characteristics that it often seems to overwhelm its object.  There are so many issues \softline
raised in the poem, so many raised by its commentators, that one reads Francesco Mazzoni's \softline
extraordinarily helpful gloss to this single verse with admiration and instruction without, at first, \softline
even noticing that it is twelve pages in length (Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla \softline
"Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967], pp. 14-25).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab Many commentators have pointed out that this opening verse echoes a biblical text, \softline
Isaiah's account of the words of Hezekiah, afflicted by the 'sickness unto death' (Isaiah 38:10): 'in \softline
dimidio dierum meorum vadam ad portas inferi' (in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the \softline
gates of the nether region).  A recent commentator has suggested that Dante's view of his kinship \softline
with Hezekiah, like himself 'a model of the sinner who finds himself and redeems himself by means \softline
of repentance and hope,' was shaped by Bernard of Clairvaux, whose thoughts about Hezekiah \softline
are found in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Sermones de diversis}{\plain \fs24 \f2  III, PL 183.546-51 (see Anthony K. Cassell,  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Lectura \softline
Dantis Americana}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 "Inferno" I}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989], p. 13).  It \softline
is also true that many another potential 'source' has found proponents, but this one is so apposite \softline
that it has probably received more attention than any other.  One other should also be mentioned \softline
here, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24 \f2  of Brunetto Latini (see note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XV.50).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab The centuries-long debate as to whether we should read the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f2  as an allegory, in \softline
which the surface action is to be understood as a fictive wrapping meant to bring the reader \softline
moralizing messages, or as the 'historical' record of an actual visit to the afterworld by a specific \softline
individual begins right here.  Exemplary of the first tendency is the allegorical reading of the first \softline
verse found in Guido da Pisa (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.1): 'Per istud dimidium nostre vite accipe somnum' \softline
(for this 'middle of our life' understand 'sleep'), a reading found as well in Dante's son Pietro \softline
(Pietro1 to}{\plain \fs24 \f2  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.1), who also glosses the meaning of the line as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 somnus}{\plain \fs24 \f2  -- 'sleep' -- and thus \softline
indeed 'dream' (the related term }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 somnium}{\plain \fs24 \f2  has both meanings in Latin).  The poem, as a result, is \softline
seen as a 'dream vision,' which must be interpreted allegorically, as a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 fabula}{\plain \fs24 \f2  with a hidden \softline
meaning that needs to be teased out of it.  Mazzoni demonstrates that this basic view of the poem \softline
was common to many of its early commentators.  However, alongside of it there existed a second \softline
view (sometimes combined with the first, sometimes at least intrinsically opposing it), one which \softline
held that the reference is to the age of Dante when he made his voyage (he was thirty-five years \softline
old in 1300, half of the biblical 'three score and ten' of Psalms 89:10).  This tradition begins with \softline
his elder son (and commentator) Jacopo and reaches its clearest expression in the Ottimo's third \softline
redaction, ca. 1340 (unpublished, see Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina \softline
Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967], p. 15, for the text), citing Dante's \softline
own }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (IV.xxiii.9-14) by name and chapter (and this is perhaps the first }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 precise}{\plain \fs24 \f2  textual \softline
citation of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  that we possess) for the discussion of the four ages of man found there.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab These conflicting ways of looking at the narrative, present here at its very threshold, force \softline
us to make a choice as to whether we should take the poem as presenting an autobiographical \softline
narrative that, even though we know it to be fictive, must be dealt with as though it were \softline
'historical,' or as merely a fiction, and thus to be dealt with as we have been taught to deal with \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 any such human poetic production, by 'allegorizing' it to find a deeper meaning.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab Related issues are also debated by the earliest commentators, in particular the date of the \softline
vision.  While there has been disagreement even about the year of the journey to the otherworld, \softline
indicated at various points as being 1300 (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . X.79-80, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XXI.113, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . II.98, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
XXXII.2), it is pellucidly clear that Dante has set his work in the Jubilee Year, proclaimed by \softline
Pope Boniface VIII in February of 1300.  Far more uncertainty attends the question of the actual \softline
days indicated.  Dante's descent into hell is begun either on Friday 25 March or on Friday 8 April, \softline
with the conclusion of the journey occurring almost exactly one week later.  There is a large \softline
bibliography on the question.  For a review see Bruno Basile, 'viaggio' (ED.1976.5), pp. 995-99.  \softline
Basile and this writer both find most convincing the arguments of Amerindo Camilli, "La \softline
cronologia del viaggio dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f2  29 (1950), 61-84, who argues strongly for the \softline
March dates.  There can hardly be a more propitious date for a beginning, as Camilli pointed out.  \softline
March 25th is, for Dante, the anniversary of the creation of Adam, of the conception and of the \softline
crucifixion of Christ, and also marks the Florentine 'New Year,' since that city measured the year \softline
from the Annunciation (25 March).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab There is a further and related problem that will detain us a moment longer.  At least since \softline
Plato's time the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 annus magnus (}{\plain \fs24 \f2 'great year'), that cycle that brings all the stars back to their \softline
original alignment in the heavens, was thought to last 36,000 years.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (II.v.16) Dante \softline
accepts that traditional view.  It is, however, an interesting fact that Filippo Villani, commenting \softline
on the first canto of the poem early in the fifteenth century, says that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 annus magnus }{\plain \fs24 \f2 contains \softline
13,000 years (ed. Bellomo, p. 83).  For Villani the number does not count the years of the great \softline
revolution of the heavens, but the years of human life on earth.  His number is interesting, since it \softline
has the effect of making Dante's journey occur at nearly the precise mid-point of the cycle of the \softline
years allotted to humanity's earthly 'voyage,' a second sort of 'great year,' as it were, in the year \softline
6499 (extractable from Dante's numeration of the ages found in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . 26.118-123).  Bellomo's \softline
note to the passage in Villani suggests that there was one Christian tradition that saw the year \softline
1300 as, indeed, the midpoint in this 13,000-year cycle.  Villani's interpretation is that what is at \softline
stake here is not the story of one life but that of humanity (see Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo \softline
commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967],  pp. 18, \softline
21), for discussion of Villani's gloss, which is not acceptable in its excision of Dante's life from the \softline
equation, but has other promising aspects).  If we follow Villani, we can see that Dante's first \softline
verse, with something approaching terrifying precision, dates the opening of his poem to the \softline
midpoint of his own life and to that of the life of the species.  And thus {\u8219\'27}Nel mezzo del cammin di \softline
nostra vita{\u8219\'27} means exactly two complementary things: when the author had lived 35 of the 70 \softline
years alloted to humans; when the human race had lived the first half of its allotted time on earth.  \softline
For the most recent discussion to link a 13,000-year }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 annus magnus}{\plain \fs24 \f2  and Dante's opening verse see \softline
Guglielmo Gorni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante nella selva: il primo canto della "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Parma: Pratiche, 1995), \softline
p. 60.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 2.  mi ritrovai}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (I came to myself) has the sense of a sudden shocked discovery.  Padoan \softline
has said this well (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.2): 'It is the pained amazement of one who has only now, for \softline
the first time, become aware that he is in peril.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab The grammatical solecism ('Nel mezzo del cammin di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 nostra}{\plain \fs24 \f2  vita / }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 mi}{\plain \fs24 \f2  ritrov}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 ai}{\plain \fs24 \f2 '), mixing \softline
plural and singular first-persons, is another sign of the poet's desire to make his reader think, \softline
realizing the relation between the individual and the universal, between Dante and all humankind.  
His voyage is meant to be understood as ours as well.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 selva oscura}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is one of the governing images of this canto and of the poem.  Many \softline
commentators point to the previous metaphorical statement found in the Dantean work that is \softline
probably nearest in time to it, the fourth treatise of his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (IV.xxiv.12), where the author \softline
refers to 'la selva erronea di questa vita' (the error-filled wood of this life).  But here the wood is \softline
to be taken 'historically' in at least a certain sense, and seems to reflect, to some readers, the \softline
condition of Eden after the Fall.  In such a reading, Dante's sinful life is as though lived in the \softline
ruins of Eden, the place to which he has let himself be led, away from the light of God.  In any \softline
case, and to agree with Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967] ), p. 85, the wood indicates not sin itself, but \softline
human life lived in the condition of sin.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 3.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   See Wisdom (Sap. 5:7): 'Lassati sumus in via iniquitate et perditionis, et ambulavimus \softline
vias difficiles; viam autem Domini ignoravimus' (We grew weary in the way of iniquity and \softline
perdition, and we walked difficult pathways; to the way of the Lord, however, we paid no \softline
attention).  The citation is found in Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . III.3).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 ch{\f3\u233\'e9}}{\plain \fs24 \f2  has been a source of energetic debate.  All students of Dante understand \softline
that the accents and marks of punctuation in editions of his texts are necessarily problematic.  We \softline
have no autograph manuscript to turn to, and fourteenth-century scribal practice in this respect is \softline
various in itself and different from our own.  Here we are dealing with a dispute that has gone on \softline
for centuries (for a review see Mazzoni [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Florence: Sansoni, 1967), pp. 31-32]).  While there are a number of \softline
solutions that have been put forward, the two current views that have large numbers of supporters \softline
are that of Antonino Pagliaro (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Ulisse}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 ricerche semantiche sulla "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  \softline
[Messina-Florence: D'Anna, 1967]), pp. 14-15 (n. 9), for whom }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 che}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is a 'relative conjunction' used \softline
to express mode, or result (i.e., 'so that the straight way was lost') and that of Giorgio Petrocchi \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Le Lettere, 1994 (1966)], }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , p. 3), who \softline
argues for the causal conjunction }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 ch{\f3\u233\'e9}}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  We, if we were editing rather than translating the text, \softline
would side with Pagliaro (and now with Gorni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante nella selva: il primo canto della \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Parma: Pratiche, 1995], pp. 64-65). \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 5.  forte }{\plain \fs24 \f2  (dense): see Boccaccio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.5), cited by Padoan (comm to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.5): \softline
'difficult to move through and to escape from.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 7.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Perhaps the first serious interpretive tangle for readers of the poem.  (There will be \softline
many more.)  See the summary of the various arguments presented by Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un \softline
nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), \softline
pp. 49-51.  The problem is a simple one to describe: what is the antecedent of the implicit subject \softline
of the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 {\f4 \'50}}{\plain \fs24 \f2  ('}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 It}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is so bitter...')?  There are three feminine nouns that may have that role, since the \softline
predicate adjective, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 amara}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (bitter), is also in the feminine: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 cosa}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (v. 4), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 selva}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (v. 5), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 paura}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (v. 6).  \softline
Mazzoni, Pagliaro (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Ulisse}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 ricerche semantiche sulla "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Messina-Florence: \softline
D'Anna, 1967), p. 639, and Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ), all are \softline
convinced that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 selva}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is the antecedent.  Our translation attempts to leave the at least apparent \softline
ambiguity of Dante's phrasing intact.  On the other hand, in the role of commentator, this writer is \softline
close to certain that a sixteenth-century commentator had long ago solved the problem (and had 
many followers through the nineteenth century, e.g., Campi, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.7): the antecedent is \softline
the phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 cosa dura}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Castelvetro, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.7).  Indeed, the entire passage makes good \softline
sense when read this way.  To tell of his experience in the dark and savage wood is difficult (vv. \softline
4-6) and so bitter that only dying seems more bitter; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 but}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , in order to treat of the better things he \softline
found in the wood, he }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 will}{\plain \fs24 \f2  speak.  In verse 4 it was difficult to speak of such things; in v. 9 he will \softline
speak of them (the same verb is used in each verse, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 dire}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ).  Further, the present tense of the verb in \softline
v. 7 works against }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 selva}{\plain \fs24 \f2  as antecedent: the writer is no longer in the wood.  Grammatically, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 selva}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , \softline
currently the most popular choice, is the least likely of the three.  And Dante's fear (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 paura}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ), which \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 is}{\plain \fs24 \f2  present, just does not make as much logical sense as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 cosa dura}{\plain \fs24 \f2  as antecedent.  Gorni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante \softline
nella selva: il primo canto della "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Parma: Pratiche, 1995],  pp. 63-64) also believes \softline
that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 cosa dura}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is the antecedent.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 8-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   These innocent-sounding lines have been the cause of considerable puzzlement.  For \softline
a review see Mazzoni (Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 51-55.  What is 'the good' that Dante \softline
found?  What are the 'other things'?  As Parodi (cited by Mazzoni, p. 55) has argued, these terms \softline
are in antithetic relation.  This is not the usual interpretation, but perhaps a convincing one, given \softline
Dante's own earlier formulation, put in evidence by Parodi: 'lo bene e l'altro' of a person, that is, \softline
the worth and failings of a being (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  II.x.9).  See also, centuries earlier, Filippo Villani (ed. \softline
Bellomo, p. 93), 'de bonis et malis in silva repertis' (of the good and the bad found in the forest).  \softline
Following this interpretation yields the following general sense of the passage: 'Even in the depths \softline
of my sin I found God in terrible things.'  And thus the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 ben}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is not here Virgil (as many \softline
commentators suggest, despite the fact that Virgil does not appear to Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 in}{\plain \fs24 \f2  the forest), but, \softline
this writer would argue, God's grace in allowing Dante to learn of His goodness even in his worst \softline
experiences.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 11.  pien di sonno}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  The date is Thursday 24 March (or 7 April?) 1300.  As the text will \softline
later make clear (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XXI.112-114), we are observing the 1266th anniversary of Good Friday \softline
(which fell on 8 April in 1300, even if Dante pretty clearly also indicates 25 March as the \softline
supposed date of the beginning of the journey [see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.1]).  This would indicate that \softline
the poem actually begins on Thursday evening, the 1266th anniversary of Maundy Thursday, \softline
when the Apostles slept while Christ watched in the garden, and then even when He called to \softline
them to rise.  That this moment is recalled here seems likely: Dante, too, is 'asleep' to Christ in his \softline
descent into sin.  See Matthew 26:40-46.  This interesting observation was, as far as one can tell, \softline
first made some years ago by a student, Andrew Bramante (Dartmouth '81).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab Filippo Villani (ed. Bellomo, pp. 95-96), here thinks of the temptation by the serpent of \softline
Adam who 'quando, ratione in ipso penitus dormiente,... sensualitati factus est obediens' (when, \softline
his reason sleeping within him,... became ruled by his senses).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 13.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 colle}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (hill) is generally interpreted as signifying the good life attainable by \softline
humankind under its own powers; some, however, believe it has a supernatural meaning, e.g., \softline
Tristano Bolelli, "Il 'dilettoso monte' del I canto dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (v. 77)," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Studi in onore di Alberto \softline
Chiari}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Brescia: Paideia, 1973), pp. 165-68.  For discussion and strong support for the first \softline
reading, based in texts of Aristotle, Brunetto Latini, and Dante himself (esp. }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Mon}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . III.xvi.7: \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 beatitudo huius vitae}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [the blessedness of this life]), see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento 
alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 58-60.  Recently \softline
Anthony Cassell has tried to make the case that this attempted climb on Dante's part is prideful \softline
and to be condemned as a sort of 'Pelagian' assault on God's grace (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Lectura Dantis Americana}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 "Inferno" I}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989],  pp. 22-30), a reading that has \softline
not proven particularly convincing, in part because it means that we must consider Virgil's later \softline
exhortation of Dante to climb the mountain (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.76-78) an error of considerable weight, and this \softline
seems a forced interpretation in that circumstance.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 14.  valle}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (valley): another key word in this landscape.  Dante's descent into the valley \softline
where the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 selva}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is located marks a major moral failure and brings him close to death.  What all \softline
this means in terms of Dante's actual life is extremely difficult to say.  It also raises the question of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 when}{\plain \fs24 \f2  this or these misadventure(s) occurred, before March 1300, or after the imagined date of the \softline
poem's action.  This is a matter addressed centrally by Lino Pertile in "Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : Beyond \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Stilnovo}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f2  13 (1993), 47-77, if with respect to passages in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , but in ways that are relevant to the question whenever it is posed.  Does Dante \softline
restrict reference in the poem to events and activities that have occurred before 1300 (except \softline
when he develops 'prophetic' intercalations to excuse such advance knowledge)?  Or does he feel \softline
free to violate the temporal boundaries that he himself has established in order to include more of \softline
his experience as material for his poem?  In disagreement with Pertile, this writer supports the \softline
second alternative.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 15.  paura}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (fear), as many have pointed out, is perhaps the key word, in the beginning of \softline
the poem, that describes Dante's perilous inner condition.  It occurs five times in the canto: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
I.6; here; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.19; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.44; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.53.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 16.  guardai in alto}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  For classical and patristic texts that present mankind as upright and \softline
up-looking, and thus as different from (and vastly superior to) the beasts, see Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di \softline
un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Florence: Sansoni, 1967), \softline
pp. 61-68.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 17.  pianeta}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : the rays of the sun are meant.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 18.  altrui}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (other men): all those who walk in the ways of the Lord.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 20.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   For Boffito's studies on the theories of the circulation of the blood in Dante's time see \softline
Singleton (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.20).  Singleton also mentions, as does many another modern \softline
commentator, that for Boccaccio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.20) this 'lake' or 'concavity' (or 'ventricle'?) is \softline
the place to which emotions flow in us; Boccaccio goes on to mention fear as the exemplary \softline
emotion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab For a possible earlier Dantean use of the phrase 'lago del cor' see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Rime dubbie}{\plain \fs24 \f2  III.8-9.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab In an early article in which he discusses }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  II.108, another Dantean passage about \softline
perilous waters that has caused commentators difficulty, Singleton ("'Sulla fiumana ove 'l mar non \softline
ha vanto' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , II, 108]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Romanic Review}{\plain \fs24 \f2  39 [1948], 269-77), cites a passage from Hugh of \softline
St. Victor (d. 1141) on Noah's Ark: 'And now let us understand the concupiscence of the world \softline
that is in the heart of man as waters of the flood.'  It might seem that this passage is even more 
apposite to the text before us than to the later one.  For here Dante, having come back to his \softline
senses from his concupiscent wandering, moves from appetite to shamefast fear.  That is the first \softline
step in his journey out of the 'flood' that threatens to 'drown' him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 22-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   This is the first simile in a poem that is filled with similes, as many as four hundred \softline
of them in the three }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  Here, in response to the first of them, it is perhaps helpful to \softline
observe that 'similes' in Dante are varied, and perhaps fall into three rough categories: 'classical' \softline
similes, like this one, perfectly balanced and grammatically correct; 'improper classical' similes, \softline
which are similarly balanced but not expressed with grammatical precision; simple comparisons, \softline
which are brief and unembellished.  There will be more along these lines in response to individual \softline
similes and comparisons.  For a study in English of the Dantean simile see Richard Lansing, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 From \softline
Image to Idea: A Study of the Simile in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Ravenna: Longo, 1977); for \softline
bibliography, see Madison U. Sowell, "A Bibliography of the Dantean Simile to 1981," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f2  101 (1983), 167-80.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab According to Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1969)]), pp. 84-86, this simile takes its setting from the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (I.180-181) and \softline
begins a series of linking allusions to the narrative of the first book of that poem that run through \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f2 I and II.  He argues that Dante begins his role as protagonist in this 'epic' as the 'new \softline
Aeneas'; his first words as speaker will later suggest that he is the 'new David' as well (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.65).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 24.  guata}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" \softline
--Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), p. 79, describes this verb as an intensive form of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 guardare}{\plain \fs24 \f2  that means 'to stare fixedly.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 25.  animo}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  For a series of useful distinctions about the animating forces within us see \softline
Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  \softline
(Florence: Sansoni, 1967), p. 79, citing St. Thomas's redeployment of concepts found in St. \softline
Augustine.  The soul (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 anima}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ) animates the body, while the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 animo}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is the force within us that wills.  \softline
English still has the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 animus}{\plain \fs24 \f2  that remembers this distinction.  We have translated with the \softline
word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 mind}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , hoping that it will have the feeling of 'that in us which decides.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 26-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   A much-disputed passage.  For a summarizing discussion see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di \softline
un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), \softline
pp. 79-86.  Almost all commentators equate the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 passo}{\plain \fs24 \f2  with the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 selva}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (see note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.2).  The \softline
debate centers on whether the relative pronoun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 che}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is objective or subjective, i.e., do we say 'the \softline
pass that never let a mortal being go alive' or 'the pass no mortal being ever left behind'?  Mazzoni \softline
offers convincing evidence for the second reading, on the basis of Dante's elsewise constant use of \softline
the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 lasciare}{\plain \fs24 \f2  in this way (to mean 'abandon,' 'leave behind'), even if his position is not always \softline
accepted (see, e.g., Padoan, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.27).  We have followed Mazzoni in our translation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab Dante's verse may reflect one of the first vernacular poems in Italian, the 'Laudes \softline
creaturarum' of St. Francis, vv. 27-28: 'Laudato si', mi' Signore, per sora nostra morte corporale, / \softline
de la quale nullu homo vivente p{\f4 \'62} skappare' (Blessed be thou, my Lord, for our sister mortal \softline
death, from whom no living man can escape).  Whether or not this is the case (and we might \softline
consider a second possible citation of Francis's poem in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.117 -- see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.117), \softline
the meaning would seem to be that Dante's extraordinary voyage into the afterworld will uniquely 
separate him, if only temporarily, from the world of the living while he is still alive.  This is not, as \softline
Padoan proposes, an obvious or banal verse if it is so construed.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 29.  la piaggia diserta}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : the gently sloping plain between the edge of the forest and the \softline
steeper incline of the hill.  See Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), pp. \softline
200-201, 235-36.  Singleton (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.29) insists that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 piaggia}{\plain \fs24 \f2  may here also mean 'shore' \softline
(because he is intent on associating the Exodus with this line).  This seems a less than convincing \softline
reading.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 30.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Another source of exacerbation in the commentaries.  Are we to read this line \softline
literally? metaphorically? or both ways?  Practice has varied for centuries and debate will \softline
undoubtedly continue.  For a review see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina \softline
Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 91-99.  And it is good to \softline
keep in mind Mazzoni's view that the allegorical elements of this canto are perhaps better referred \softline
to as metaphors (p. 3).  See also Zygmunt G. Baranski's study of the various kinds of allegory \softline
found in this first canto of the poem ("La lezione esegetica di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  I: allegoria, storia e \softline
letteratura nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante e le forme dell'allegoresi}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , ed. M. Picone [Ravenna: Longo, \softline
1987], pp. 79-97).  Here it seems wisest to believe that the words are meant both literally and \softline
figuratively: Dante, sorely beset by his fatigue and probably by his fear as well, is inching up the \softline
slope toward the hill by planting his bottom foot firm and pushing off it to advance the higher one.  \softline
However, and as Filippo Villani was first to note, there is a Christian tradition for such a difficult \softline
progress toward one's goal, found precisely in St. Augustine, who for a long time remained a \softline
catachumen before he chose his life in Christ (ed. Bellomo, p. 109).  John Freccero, without \softline
apparently consulting him, revisited some common ground with Villani.  According to Freccero's \softline
article 'Dante's Firm Foot and the Journey without a Guide' (1959), reprinted in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante: The \softline
Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , ed. Rachel Jacoff (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986), Dante \softline
moves forward with the right foot, representing the intellect, supported by the left foot, \softline
representing his will.  Freccero goes on to show that the resultant figuration is one of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 homo \softline
claudus}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , a limping man, wounded in both his feet by Adam's sin.  What Freccero has not \softline
apparently noticed is that Villani (ed. Bellomo, pp. 110-11) had said much of what he says (for \softline
this observation see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Princeton: Princeton University \softline
Press, 1969, pp. 262-63): Dante's 'firm foot' is his left foot, the foot of his will, steady in its fear of \softline
the Lord; the upper right foot is his affection for God (Villani's formulation is dependent, as \softline
Bellomo points out, on that of Guido da Pisa [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.30]).  Villani concludes by \softline
comparing the left foot to the Old Testament, the right to the New (ed. Bellomo, p. 111).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 32-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 lonza}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (for the identity of this beast as hybrid born of leopard and lion see \softline
Singleton (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.32) is the first of three beasts to move against Dante as he attempts to \softline
mount the hill.  Commentators (beginning perhaps with Tommaseo [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.49-51]) \softline
frequently point to a biblical passage as lying behind Dante's three beasts, the passage in Jeremiah \softline
(Ier. 5:6) that describes three wild animals (lion, wolf, and 'pard' [a leopard or panther]) that will \softline
fall upon Jerusalemites because of their transgressions and backsliding.  The details are close \softline
enough, and the typological identification of the sinful protagonist with the backsliding Hebrews \softline
fitting enough, to make the literal sense of the situation clear.  Less positive claims may be made \softline
regarding its metaphorical valence.  For a thorough review of one of the most vexed passages in a 
canto filled with difficulty, see Gaetano Ragonese, 'fiera' (ED.1970.2), pp. 857b-861b (with \softline
extensive bibliography through 1969, if it omits the useful study of Aldo S. Bernardo ["The Three \softline
Beasts and Perspective in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Divine Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 PMLA}{\plain \fs24 \f2  78 (1963), 14-24]).  Ragonese's history of \softline
the interpretation of the three beasts includes the following details: The early commentators are \softline
strikingly in accord; for them the beasts signify }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 (1) three of the seven mortal sins: lust, pride, \softline
and avarice.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Modern interpreters mainly -- but not entirely, as we shall see -- reject this \softline
formulation.  One school cites }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VI.75 for the three 'sparks' that have lit evil fires in the hearts \softline
of contemporary Florentines, according to Ciacco, who is seconded by Brunetto Latini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
XV.68): }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 (2) envy, pride, and avarice}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  Others suggest that there is no reason here to believe that \softline
Dante is referring to the mortal sins}{\plain \fs24 \b\f2  }{\plain \fs24 \f2 because there is no precise textual confirmation that such was \softline
his plan.  They suggest that such a confirmation is found in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  XI.81-82, where, describing \softline
the organization of the punishment of sin, Virgil speaks of }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 (3) 'the three dispositions Heaven \softline
opposes, incontinence, malice, and mad brutishness.'}{\plain \fs24 \f2   In this approach, there are strong \softline
disagreements as to which beast represents which Aristotelian/Ciceronian category of sin: is the \softline
leopard fraud or incontinence? is the she-wolf incontinence or fraud? (the lion is seen by all those \softline
of this 'school' as violence).  For instance, some have asked, if the leopard is fraud, the worst of \softline
the three dispositions to sin, why is it the beast that troubles Dante the least of them?  A possible \softline
answer is that the scene, which takes place on earth and not in hell, is meant to show Dante's \softline
tendencies with respect to the three large areas of sin punished in hell.  If the leopard represents \softline
fraud (as its spotted hide might indicate -- it is beautiful but 'maculate' [see the argument in this \softline
vein of Padoan, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.33]), it is the disposition least present in Dante.  Perhaps the \softline
single most important passage in the text of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  that identifies at least one of the three beasts \softline
in such a way as to leave no doubt occurs in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Infern}{\plain \fs24 \f2 o XVI.106-108, where Dante tells us that he \softline
was wearing a cord that he once used to attempt to capture the beast with 'the painted pelt.'  That \softline
this cord is used as a challenge to Geryon, the guardian of the pit of Fraud, makes it seem nearly \softline
necessary that in this passage the leopard is meant to signify fraud.  If that is true, it would seem \softline
also necessary that the lion would stand for Violence and the she-wolf for Incontinence.  The last \softline
formulation is the trickiest to support.  The she-wolf is mainly associated, in the poem (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
XX.10-15), with avarice.  But avarice }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 is}{\plain \fs24 \f2  a sin of Incontinence.  Thus Dante presents himself as \softline
most firm against Fraud, less firm against Violence, and weak when confronted by Incontinence.  \softline
In his case the sin of incontinence that afflicts him most is lust, not avarice.  This is the best \softline
understanding that this reader has been able to manage.  It is not one that gathers anything like \softline
immediate consent.  The three beasts are another of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f2 's little mysteries likely to remain \softline
unsolved.  But see the extended discussion in Gorni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante nella selva: il primo canto della \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Parma: Pratiche, 1995), pp. 23-55.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab The formulation of the early commentators (}{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 [1] lust, pride, and avarice}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ) has had a \softline
resurgence in our time.  It would certainly be pleasing to have reason to assent to their nearly \softline
unanimous understanding.  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967], pp. 99-102) has given, basing his argument on \softline
texts found in the Bible and in the writings of the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, good reason \softline
for returning to this view.  (For an opposing argument, advancing five reasons for which the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 lonza}{\plain \fs24 \f2  \softline
cannot represent lust, see Romano Manescalchi [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Il prologo della "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Turin: \softline
Tirrenia, 1998)], pp. 13-36.)  If it were not for the passage in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XVI.106-108, it would be easy \softline
to be convinced by his argument.  However, the passage is there, and seems unalterably to \softline
associate Geryon and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 lonza}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  And then the field of reference seems far more likely to be that 
established within the poem for the three major sins punished in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  than anything else.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab It should also be noted that a number of still other modern interpreters have proposed \softline
various political identities for the three beasts, perhaps the most popular being }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 (4) the leopard as \softline
Dante's Florentine enemies, the lion as the royal house of France, the she-wolf as the forces \softline
of the papacy}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  It is difficult to align such a view with the details in the text, which seem surely to \softline
be pointing to a moral rather than a political view of the situation of the protagonist as the poem \softline
begins.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab For a lengthy discussion of the problem in English see Cassell, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Lectura Dantis Americana}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 "Inferno" I}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989), pp. 45-76.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 33.  di pel macolato...coverta}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (covered with a spotted pelt).  For the resonance of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (I.323), the phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 maculosae tegmine lyncis}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (the spotted hide of the lynx) see the \softline
tradition in the commentaries perhaps begun by Pietro Alighieri (Pietro1, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.33) and \softline
furthered by Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.33).  This citation is now pretty much a \softline
commonplace.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 38.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Dante and others in his time believed that the sun was in the constellation of Aries at \softline
the creation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 48.  }{\plain \fs24 \b\i\f2 tremesse}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (trembled).  The 1921 edition had }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 temesse}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (feared), a reading supported by \softline
the vast bulk of the MSS but, as Petrocchi argues, a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 lectio facilior}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 La Commedia secondo \softline
l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Florence: Le Lettere, 1994 [1966]), vol. I, Introduzione, pp. 165-66.  Did the \softline
very air seem 'fearful'?  Or did it seem to 'tremble'?  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla \softline
"Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967], pp. 108-9, strongly \softline
supports Petrocchi for the second alternative.  Our translation necessarily follows Petrocchi{\u8219\'27}s \softline
choice, even if we believe that the question remains open.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 52.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   For the word }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 gravezza}{\plain \fs24 \f2  in the sense of 'grave malessere corporeo' (serious bodily \softline
illness), Chiamenti ("Un'altra }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 schedula}{\plain \fs24 \f2  ferina: Dante, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I 52," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Lingua nostra}{\plain \fs24 \f2  60 (1999), 34-38) \softline
cites }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Bestiari medievali}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , ed. L. Morini (Torino: Einaudi, 1987), pp. 435-36, as well as Lewis and \softline
Short, eds., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Oxford Latin Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , the second definition of the Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 gravitas}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  The bestiary's \softline
description of the wolf, cited by Chiamenti, gives the animal's glance the power to cause in the \softline
man that it beholds a loss of all his physical powers, to move, to speak, etc.  It is in this sense \softline
then, according to Chiamenti, that the protagonist 'lost hope of making the ascent' (v. 54).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 55-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Dante's second simile in the canto turns from the semantic field of epic and \softline
perilous adventure to the more mundane but not much less perilous activity of the merchant or the \softline
gambler, his financial life hanging in the balance as he awaits news of an arriving ship or the throw \softline
of the dice -- just at that moment at which his stomach sinks in the sudden awareness that he has \softline
in fact, and unthinkably, lost.  See the stunning simile involving gambling and gamblers that opens \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  VI (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VI.1-12).  Gianfranco Contini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Un' idea di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Turin: Einaudi, 1976]), \softline
p. 138, insists that Dante is thinking of gambling here, too.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 61.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   For Dante's verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 rovinare}{\plain \fs24 \f2  see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina \softline
Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967], p. 114, citing }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . IV.vii.9: 'La 
via... de li malvagi {\f4 \'50} oscura.  Elli non sanno dove rovinano' (The path of the wicked is a dark one.  \softline
They do not know where they are rushing).  Mazzoni points out that Dante is translating Proverbs \softline
4:19, substituing }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 ruinare}{\plain \fs24 \f2  for the biblical }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 correre}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 62.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Dante's phrasing that describes Virgil's appearance to the protagonist ('dinanzi a li \softline
occhi mi si fu offerto') reminded Tommaseo (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.62) of the phrasing that describes \softline
Venus's appearance to her son, Aeneas, when the latter is intent on killing Helen in order to \softline
avenge the harm done to Troy by the Greek surprise attack within the walls of Troy: 'mihi se... \softline
ante ocul[o]s... obtulit.'  Any number of later commentators have also made this ascription.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 63.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   For lengthy reviews of the problems raised by centuries of exegesis of this difficult \softline
verse see Giorgio Brugnoli ("Chi per lungo silenzio parea fioco," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Letterature comparate: \softline
problemi e metodo.  Studi}{\plain \fs24 \f2  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 in onore di Ettore Paratore}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , vol. 3 [Bologna: P{\f4 \'42}tron, 1981], pp. 1169-82) and Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Olschki, 1983]), \softline
pp. 23-79.  Both of these writers independently agree on most of the key elements in the puzzle: \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 fioco}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is to be taken as visual rather than aural; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 silenzio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is understood as deriving from the \softline
Virgilian sense of the silence of the dead shades (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VI.264: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 umbrae silentes}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ).  It is fair \softline
also to say that neither deals convincingly with the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 lungo}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  How can one }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 see}{\plain \fs24 \f2  that a \softline
'silence' is of long duration?  A recent intervention by Gino Casagrande ("Parole di Dante: il \softline
'lungo silenzio' di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  I, 63," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Giornale storico della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f2  174 [1997], 246-48) \softline
makes a strong case for interpreting the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 lungo}{\plain \fs24 \f2  as here meaning 'vast, extensive.'  \softline
Casagrande's second point, that the 'silence' refers to the wood is well argued and seems \softline
attractive.  He believes (pp. 251-54) that Uguccione da Pisa, one of Dante's main encyclopedic \softline
sources, in the MS Can Misc. 305 in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, dating from 1262, offers the \softline
Greek word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 xylon}{\plain \fs24 \f2  as equivalent to the Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 lignum}{\plain \fs24 \f2  for 'forest.'  The Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 silva}{\plain \fs24 \f2  may thus derive \softline
from a word that means, according to Uguccione, 'vastitas vel silentium.  Inde silva ubi sunt loca \softline
vasta et deserta et silentio plena' (vastness or silence; and thus a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 silva}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is a place marked by a space \softline
that is extensive, deserted, and full of silence).  There is perhaps no other brief passage ever \softline
adduced that is as close to Dante's line.  Casagrande's paraphrase of the verse is thus 'uno che \softline
nella grande selva appariva indistinto' (one who in the vast forest was hard to make out).  This \softline
would be convincing except for a single detail: Virgil does not appear to Dante in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 selva}{\plain \fs24 \f2  but on \softline
the plain between forest and mountain, as the protagonist runs back down toward the forest (but \softline
not into it).  And thus one may be disposed to accept Casagrande's reading of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 lungo}{\plain \fs24 \f2  while \softline
adjusting his sense of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 silenzio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  to make it refer to the 'silent' space between the mountain and the \softline
wood.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  I.64.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab Padoan makes the point (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.63) that it is Aristotle, and not Virgil, who is \softline
'maestro e duca de la ragione umana' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . IV.iv.8), not to mention 'maestro di color che sanno' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . IV.131).  Virgil is more significant a figure for being a poet, and is also seen as having come \softline
closer, in some mysterious way, to the truths of Christianity.  On this subject see Courcelle ("Les \softline
P{\f4 \'50}res de l'{\f3\u201\'c9}glise devant les Enfers virgiliens," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Archives d'histoire doctrinale et litt{\f3\u233\'e9}raire du \softline
Moyen Age}{\plain \fs24 \f2  30 (1955), 5-74.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab For a more recent discussion of this tormented verse see Anthony Cassell, "Il silenzio di \softline
Virgilio: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  I, 62-63," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24 \f2  18 (1989), 165-76 and his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Lectura Dantis \softline
Americana}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 "Inferno" I}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989), pp. 84-93.  For a \softline
previous review of the dispute over the verse's meaning, arguing for the resonance in Dante's 
verse of the death of Misenus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VI.149), see Sanguineti, Federico, "L'ombra di Miseno nella \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Belfagor}{\plain \fs24 \f2  40 (1985), 403-16.  For considerations of the implications of the silence \softline
surrounding Virgil{\u8219\'27}s first appearance in the poem, see Denise Heilbronn-Gaines, "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  I: \softline
Breaking the Silence," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante's "Inferno."  The Indiana Critical Edition}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , trans. and ed. M. \softline
Musa (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995), pp. 286-98; see also Andreas Heil, "Dantes \softline
Staunen und die Schaum Vergils: Bemerkungen zu }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  1, 61-87," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Deutsches Dante-Jahrbuch}{\plain \fs24 \f2  \softline
77 (2002), 27-43. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 64.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Virgil appears to Dante }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 nel gran diserto}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  The adjective is probably meant to recall \softline
the first description of the place, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 la piaggia diserta}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.29).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 65-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Dante's first spoken word as character is his own poem is Latin (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Miserere}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , 'Have \softline
mercy').  This is interesting linguistically, as it indicates a Latin capacity in the author/protagonist \softline
that might serve as a defense against those who think the poem, if it is to be taken 'seriously,' \softline
should have been written in Latin.  But the Latin in question has a more important aspect: it is the \softline
language of the Church, the first word of the fiftieth Psalm (Psalms 50:1).  Thus our hero is \softline
idenitified as a son of the Church -- albeit a currently failing one -- at the outset of the work.  For \softline
several of the recurring references to that Psalm in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , see Hollander, "Dante's Use of \softline
the Fiftieth Psalm," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f2  91 (1973), 145-50.  Vincent Truijen, 'David,' states that David \softline
is the personage in the Old Testament most referred to by Dante (ED.1970.2, p. 322b).  It has \softline
also been pointed out that, typically enough, this first utterance made by the protagonist involves \softline
a double citation, the first biblical, the second classical, Aeneas's speech to his mother, Venus \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.327-330).  See Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1969), pp. 88-89.  (For an earlier appreciation of the echo of Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 o dea certe}{\plain \fs24 \f2  \softline
in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 od omo certo}{\plain \fs24 \f2  see Tommaseo, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.66.)  As for the meaning of the word \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 ombra}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : the nature of shades in Dante is addressed by Domenico Consoli, 'ombra' (ED.1973.4), \softline
pp. 141-45.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 67-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   See Gian Carlo Alessio and Claudia Villa, "Per }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  I, 67-87," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante e la \softline
"bella scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f4 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , ed. A. A. Iannucci (Ravenna: Longo, 1993 \softline
[1984], pp. 41-64), for an important consideration of Dante's debt to the traditional classical and \softline
medieval 'lives of the poets' in formulating his own brief }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 vita Virgilii}{\plain \fs24 \f2  in this passage.  Among \softline
other things, such a view effectively undercuts those interpreters who try to make Virgil an \softline
'allegory' of reason.  He is presented as a real person with a real history and is thoroughly \softline
individuated.  No one could mistake the details of this life for that of another, and no one has.  \softline
For sensible opposition to the notion that Virgil stands for the abstract quality of reason, see \softline
Davis (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante and the Idea of Rome}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1957]), pp. 124-32.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}\sect \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 70.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   This much-debated verse has left many in perplexity.  In what sense are we to take the \softline
phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 sub Iulio}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ?  What is the implicit subject of the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 fosse}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ?  What is the precise meaning of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 tardi}{\plain \fs24 \f2  ('late')?  Virgil was born in 70 B.C., Julius died in 44 B.C., and Virgil died in 19 B.C.  For a \softline
discussion in English see Michael Wigodsky, "'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Nacqui }{\plain \fs24 \f2 sub Iulio' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I, 70)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f2  93 \softline
(1975), 177-83.  Hardly any two early commentators have the same opinion about this verse.  Has \softline
Dante made a mistake about the date of Julius's governance?  Or does }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 sub Iulio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  only mean 'in the \softline
days of Julius'?  Was Virgil's birth late for him to have been honored by Julius?  Or does the clause 
indicate that, although he was born late in pagan times, it was still too early for him to hear of \softline
Christianity?  The most usual contemporary reading is perhaps well stated by Padoan (comm. to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.70): the Latin phrase is only meant to indicate roughly the time of Julius, and nothing more \softline
specific than that; when Julius died, Virgil was only 26 and had not begun his poetic career, which \softline
was thus to be identified with Augustus, rather than with Julius.  Alessio and Villa ("Per }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  I, \softline
67-87," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante e la "bella scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f4 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , ed. A. A. Iannucci \softline
[Ravenna: Longo, 1993 (1984)], p. 49), point out, however, that there was at least one source \softline
that would have made Dante's line make clear literal sense: a ninth-century French text of the \softline
works of Virgil with a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 vita Virgilii}{\plain \fs24 \f2  that insisted that the poet was born }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 after}{\plain \fs24 \f2  Julius had come to \softline
political power (in the triumvirate with Pompey and Crassus).  Thus it is at least possible that all \softline
the exertion of commentators is vain and that Dante is resorting to a source that makes Virgil's \softline
life run under the authority of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 both}{\plain \fs24 \f2  the first two Caesars.  (It is important for modern readers to \softline
know that Dante believed, in accord with medieval tradition, that Julius was in fact the first \softline
Roman emperor.)  For a development of this discussion, suggesting that the difficult verse has a \softline
fairly straightforward explanation, see Violetta de Angelis and Gian Carlo Alessio, "'Nacqui sub \softline
Julio, ancor che fosse tardi' (<I>Inf</I>. 1. 70)," <I>Quaderni di Acme (Facolt{\f4 \'42} de Lettere e \softline
Filosofia, Universit{\f4 \'42} degli Studi di Milano) 41 (2000), pp. 127-45.  De Angelis and Alessio point \softline
out the following. Various biographies of Virgil at least potentially available to Dante placed the \softline
Roman poet's birth in 59-58 B.C. (not in the year 70) and also told that Julius held his first \softline
consulship in Mantua in 59 B.C. Thus Virgil in these lines refers to these two facts and really \softline
means that he was born }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 sub Iulio}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , while lamenting that Caesar's death in 44 B.C., when Virgil was \softline
only fourteen or fifteen years old, deprived him of the opportunity to have been known to Caesar \softline
once he had begun writing his Eclogues, ca. 30 B.C. This seems clearly the best hypothesis that \softline
we currently have in order to explain this line.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 71.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   See Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), pp. 201-2, for \softline
the force and frequent presence of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 buon}{\plain \fs24 \f2  in this sense in Dante: i.e., Augustus was excellent in his \softline
role as emperor.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 73.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 poeta}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is one of the most potent words in Dante's personal vocabulary of \softline
honor and esteem.  It is used 30 times in all throughout the poem in this form, seven more times in \softline
others.  In its first use, here, it constitutes Virgil's main claim as Dante's guide.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 74.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The word }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 di}{\plain \fs24 \f2  here, as is frequently the case in Dante, means }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 da}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (from), not 'of.' \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 75.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 superbo Il{\f4 \'56}{\f3\u243\'f3}n}{\plain \fs24 \f2  clearly mirrors }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f2  III.2-3, 'superbum / Ilium.'  It almost \softline
certainly has a moralizing overtone here (see also note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.106), while in Virgil it probably \softline
only indicates the 'topless towers of Troy'; in Dante it gives us some sense that Troy may have \softline
fallen because of its }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 superbia}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , or pride.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 77.  dilettoso monte}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : in no ways different from the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 colle}{\plain \fs24 \f2  of verse 13.  See note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
I.13.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 79.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   At this first appearance of Virgil's name in Dante's text (it will appear 30 times more), \softline
it is probably worth noting that Dante's spelling of the name is not only his, but a medieval Italian 
idiosyncrasy.  Translating 'Vergilius' with 'Virgilio' was intended to lend the Latin poet a certain \softline
dignity (by associating him with the noun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 vir}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , man) and/or a certain mysterious power (by \softline
associating him with the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 virga}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , or 'rod' with magical power).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab For Virgil as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 fons}{\plain \fs24 \f2  or 'source,' Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina \softline
Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), p. 121, adduces Donatus's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Life of \softline
Virgil}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (cited by P{\f3\u233\'e9}zard, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante sous la pluie de feu}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Paris: Vrin, 1950], p. 352), in which Homer is \softline
said to be a 'largissimus fons' (unlimited source) of things poetic.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 81.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Why is Dante's head 'bent low in shame'?  Torraca (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.81), citing \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (IV.xxv.10), argues that the protagonist feels shame for a fault committed, his having \softline
lost the true way.  Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934], p. 202) argues, \softline
citing a passage just previous to the one adduced by Torraca (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  IV.xxv.4-5), in which \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 vergogna}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is defined as amazement in beholding wonderful things, that Dante is here expressing his \softline
dazzled admiration at the coming of Virgil, not his shame for his own fault.  That is an attractive \softline
view.  Mazzoni's treatment (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" \softline
--Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967], p. 122) essentially makes room for both these \softline
interpretations.  However, a simpler solution recommends itself.  The immediate context is that of \softline
Virgil's rebuke to Dante for his failure to climb the hill and consequent ruinous flight.  It is for this \softline
reason, the argument runs, supporting Torraca's sense of the word's meaning (but not his precise \softline
interpretation), that he feels ashamed.  For a differing solution of the problem, see Andreas Heil, \softline
"Dantes Staunen und die Schaum Vergils: Bemerkungen zu }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  1, 61-87," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Deutsches Dante-Jahrbuch}{\plain \fs24 \f2  77 (2002), 27-43.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 84.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   For the lofty resonance of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 volume}{\plain \fs24 \f2  in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (as compared with }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 libro}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , \softline
another and lesser word for 'book') see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Princeton: \softline
Princeton University Press, 1969, pp. 78-79.  The Bible is the only other book so referred to.  \softline
Hollander continues by pointing out that two other words that usually refer to God's divine \softline
authority are also each used once to refer to Virgil or his writing: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 autore}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .I. 85) and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 scrittura}{\plain \fs24 \f2  \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VI.34).  For the meaning of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 cercare}{\plain \fs24 \f2  see Bellomo's note (ed. Bellomo, p. 167) to Villani's \softline
similar Latin verb (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 recircare}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ): 'studiare a fondo' (to study deeply).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 86-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   There has been much discussion of exactly what the 'noble style' is and where it is \softline
to be found in Dante's work.  Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 124-25, follows Parodi in a \softline
straightforward explanation.  The style is the 'high style' or 'tragic style' found in Virgil and other \softline
classical poets and was achieved by Dante in his odes (three of which are collected in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ), \softline
as he himself indicated in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 De vulgari Eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (II.vi.7).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab Dante's formulation here goes further, making Virgil his sole source.  His later interactions \softline
with other poets in hell (e.g., Pier delle Vigne [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XIII], Brunetto Latini [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XV]) or relatives \softline
of poets (Cavalcante [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . X]) show that not one of them is interested in the identity of Dante's \softline
guide, a fact that reflects directly on the poems left by these three practitioners, which are \softline
markedly without sign of Virgilian influence.  Thus, not only is Virgil Dante's sole source for the \softline
'noble style,' but Dante portrays himself as Virgil's sole follower among the recent and current \softline
poets of Italy.  Perhaps more than any other claim for a literary identity, this sets him apart from \softline
them.  For the opinion that Dante's insistence on Virgil as the sole source of his poetic excelling is 
a cut at Guido Cavalcanti, see Riccardo Bacchelli "'Per te poeta fui,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f2  42 (1965), \softline
8-9.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 88-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   If the hidden identities of the three beasts have caused lengthy discussion, the she-wolf, as she is presented here, has been greeted by a nearly unanimous reponse: she represents \softline
cupidity.  This sin, associated with Incontinence, is discovered in much of humankind, including \softline
Dante.  It is probably most often identified with avarice, but is related to all wrongful appetites.  It \softline
is thus the most common of sins and, because of its ready ability to infect all, the most dangerous.  \softline
See St. Paul's saying, 'Radix malorum est cupiditas' (For the love of money is the root of all evil [I \softline
Timothy 6.10]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 90.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 le vene e i polsi}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.90) cites Dante's previous reference to the \softline
pulses (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f2  II.4), those places where agitation of the blood is evident at the body's surface, and \softline
Boccaccio's gloss to this verse (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.90), which states that the veins and pulses tremble \softline
when blood rushes from them, a phenomenon occurring when the heart is troubled, according to \softline
Boccaccio, by fear.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 100-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   In a canto filled with passages that have called forth rivers of commentators' \softline
ink, perhaps none has resulted in so much interpretive excitement as this one.  For this writer's \softline
view, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Princeton: Princeton University Press), pp. 89-91.  \softline
What we deal with here is the first of three (see also }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XXXIII.37-45, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XXVII.142-148) \softline
'world-historical' prophecies of the coming of a political figure (in the last two nearly certainly an \softline
emperor) who, in his advent, also looks forward to the Second Coming of Christ.  The present \softline
prophecy, insofar as Dante, as maker of prophetic utterance, wants to allow his audience to \softline
penetrate the veil, however, is of Cangrande della Scala.  That is one man's opinion.  It finds much \softline
fellowship in the late nineteenth century (e.g., Campi{\u8219\'27}s comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.101), but is opposed by \softline
most who have considered the problem in the past century (e.g., Emilio Pasquini, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dante e le \softline
figure del vero: La fabbrica della "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Milan: Bruno Mondadori, 2001), p. 163, basing \softline
his rejection on the fact that in 1300 Cangrande was a mere nineteen years old.  But see the note \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f2  XVII.76-78.  For an excellent review of the entire problem see C. T. Davis, 'veltro' \softline
(ED.1976.5), pp. 908a-912b.  The view of this reader is largely in accord with Mazzoni's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio \softline
di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, \softline
1967]), pp. 131-33, namely, that the prophecy is insistently 'Ghibelline,' and not of a good pope or \softline
of a reform of the mendicant orders, etc.  For the view that there is indeed a Virgilian (and \softline
imperial) source for Dante's prophecy in the prediction of Augustan rule in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f2  I (vv. 286-296) \softline
see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), \softline
pp. 90-91.  This view was anticipated in a discussion that has not received much attention.  The \softline
so-called 'Ottimo commento' (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.100-111) minces no words about the resonance of \softline
that Virgilian passage here.  One wonders why his observation has been so neglected.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 101.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   As for the potentially absurd but nonetheless recurring notion that the prophecy is of \softline
Dante himself, the 'poeta veltro,' it was perhaps first advanced by one Pompeo Azzolino in a letter \softline
to Gino Capponi in 1837, according to Carlo Cuini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Qualche novit{\f4 \'42} nella Divina Commedia: Il \softline
Veltro, "il gran rifiuto" ed altro}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Agugliano: Bagaloni, 1986]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 104.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Against those who would argue that these three 'theological' qualities move the \softline
prophecy in a religious rather than a political direction, Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento \softline
alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967], pp. 133-35) \softline
responds that the attribution of such qualities to secular figures was common enough in Dante's \softline
time, and even in Dante, who says similar things about Cangrande (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XVII.83-84).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 105.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   This 'felt' has been variously explained: the felt caps of the Dioscuri, the felt tents of \softline
the great Khan, the felt of the urns in which ballots were cast for the emperor, etc.  For a review \softline
in English see Anthony Cassell, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Lectura Dantis Americana}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 "Inferno" I}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Philadelphia: University \softline
of Pennsylvania Press, 1989), pp. 94-113.  For still another attempt to unscramble the riddle, this \softline
time on the basis of names of parts of chivalric weaponry (e.g., OF }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 feutre}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , the outcropping from a \softline
saddle on which a charging knight rests his lance) -- see Fabrizio Franceschini ("'Tra feltro e \softline
feltro': l'interpretazione di Guido da Pisa e un gallicismo nell'italiano antico," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Scrinium \softline
Berolinense: Tilo Brandis zum 65. Geburtstag}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , vol. II, ed. P. J. Becker & others [Berlin: \softline
Staatsbibliothek-Preussischer Kulturbesitz, 2000]), p. 1023.  Those who believe that the verse \softline
refers to geographical sites in Italy and thus to the zone in which the young Cangrande would be \softline
of importance (he was only 9 years old in 1300, but was in charge of the armies of Verona only a \softline
few years later -- and before Dante first came to Verona in 1304) are few in number in the current \softline
age, but were far more numerous in the nineteenth century.  This writer is one in that camp.  The \softline
translators have, as always, respected the text of Petrocchi; their own version would read \softline
'between Feltre and Feltro.'  The strongest case against such a reading is lodged in the 'fact' that in \softline
the fourteenth century }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 nazione}{\plain \fs24 \f2  only meant 'birthplace' and not 'nation.'  Consultation of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Grande Dizionario}{\plain \fs24 \f2  shows that this may not always be the case.  For instance, soon after Dante, \softline
Boccaccio, in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Decameron}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (II.viii.4) uses the word in its modern sense (if he perhaps \softline
significantly does }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 not}{\plain \fs24 \f2  do so in his gloss of this verse).  In addition, Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 natio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  frequently also had \softline
this meaning, and Dante's noun may translate that usage (see, for example, Dante's own use of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 nationes}{\plain \fs24 \f2  at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Dve}{\plain \fs24 \f2  I.viii.4).  It is, however, true that the 'geographic' reading of the verse is a late \softline
phenomenon, perhaps beginning with the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Anonimo fiorentino}{\plain \fs24 \f2  at the very end of the fourteenth \softline
century (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.101-105).  It was repeated by John of Serravalle (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.105) \softline
only to be ridiculed by that commentator.  However, beginning with Guiniforto in 1440 (comm. to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.100-111), it gradually become the dominant understanding in the Renaissance, and is put \softline
forward by Vellutello, Daniello, and Castelvetro, all of whom believe that the prophecy refers to \softline
Cangrande.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 106.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 umile Italia}{\plain \fs24 \f2  surely recalls Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 humilem... Italiam}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . III.522-523), \softline
as has been frequently noted.  Some have argued that, in Dante, the words have a moral tint.  See \softline
Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  \softline
(Florence: Sansoni, 1967), pp. 135-36, for those, especially Parodi, who are of this opinion, \softline
mainly contending that the reference is to Italy's current lowly political condition.  In accord with \softline
this view, Mazzoni cites Dante's own similar formulations: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Epist}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . V.5: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 miseranda Ytalia}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Epist}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
VI.3: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Ytalia misera}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VI.76: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 serva Italia}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  Some have argued for a positive valence for the \softline
word here: see Alessandro Ronconi ("Per Dante interprete dei poeti latini," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f2  41 \softline
[1964], p. 31), who sees Italy's 'humility' as indicating her worthiness to be saved by the Veltro.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 107-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The curious intermingling of enemies (Camilla and Turnus fought }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 against}{\plain \fs24 \f2  the 
Trojan invaders, Euryalus and Nisus }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 with}{\plain \fs24 \f2  them) helps establish Dante's sense that the war was a \softline
necessary and just one, its victims as though sacrificed for the cause of establishing Rome, the \softline
'new Troy.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 109-111}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  Mazzoni (Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento alla "Divina Commedia": \softline
"Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), pp. 137-38, argues strongly for the \softline
interpretation of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 prima}{\plain \fs24 \f2  as an adjective modifying }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 invidia}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , and thus for a phrase meaning 'primal \softline
envy,' when death entered the created world precisely because of Satan's envy (see Sap. 2:24).  \softline
He notes the resulting parallel between this line and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  III.6, where God is, in His third \softline
person, 'Primo Amore' (Primal Love).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 117}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  The possibilities for interpreting this verse are various.  The 'second death' may refer \softline
to what the sinners are suffering now (in which case they cry out either for a cessation in their \softline
pain -- a 'death' of it -- or against their condition) or it may refer to the 'death' they will suffer at \softline
the end of time in Christ's final Judgment (in which case they may either be crying out }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 for}{\plain \fs24 \f2  that \softline
finality or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 against}{\plain \fs24 \f2  that horrifying prospect).  Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: \softline
Sansoni, 1934]), p. 260, argues for the 'death' of the soul at the moment of damnation, rejecting \softline
the tradition in the commentaries that associates the phrasing here both with the Book of \softline
Revelation (Apoc. 20:14): the damned, at the Last Judgment, who will undergo a 'second death' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 secunda mors}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ), and with Dante's own phrase in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Epist}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VI.5, which also makes the 'terror \softline
secundae mortis' the fear of the wicked Florentines of their fates at the Last Judgment.  Anna \softline
Maria Chiavacci Leonardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Milan: Mondadori, 1991]), \softline
p. 33, agrees with Barbi on which 'death' is at stake (the present one in hell), but not with his view \softline
that the sinners long for the 'second death,' and believes that they are lamenting its horror.  She \softline
also suggests that we hear an echo here (also adduced by Mazzoni, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Saggio di un nuovo commento \softline
alla "Divina Commedia": "Inferno" --Canti I-III}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [Florence: Sansoni, 1967]), p. 143, and Padoan \softline
[comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.117) of v. 31 of St. Francis's 'Laudes creaturarum' (for an earlier possible citation \softline
of that poem see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.27): 'ka la morte secunda no 'l farr{\f4 \'42} male' (the good soul, \softline
liberated by death, hopes that it will not suffer eternal damnation at the Last Judgment).  That the \softline
main supporting texts invoked by discussants all involve the Last Judgment would certainly lend \softline
support to that interpretation.  Thus one possibility is that the damned cry out for that future \softline
moment, either so that their pain will be eased (even though it will not be, since we learn it will be \softline
worse [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VI.109-111]), or at least to put this terrible state behind them, a thoroughly \softline
comprehensible, if irrational, wish.  Another, and it is one embraced by Mazzoni, pp. 139-45, is \softline
that the sinners are crying out in fear of the punishments to come after the Last Judgment.  One \softline
can find arguments for or against this position.  It seems the most defensible (Mazzoni cites a \softline
series of texts from St. Augustine to buttress his notion that it is the Last Judgment that confronts \softline
us here).  The only potential challenge to it is that, as Umberto Bosco claims, no one has been \softline
able to find an instance of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 gridare}{\plain \fs24 \f2  that is used in this negative way (i.e., 'to cry out \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 against}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ').  And thus Bosco/Reggio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.117) approve the judgment of Letterio \softline
Cassata, 'morte' (ED.1971.3), pp. 1040a-41b, that the damned 'invoke' the Last Judgment.  It \softline
seems to this reader that Mazzoni's solution is the most sensible, especially since, a mere two \softline
dozen lines earlier, Dante has used the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 gridare}{\plain \fs24 \f2  with exactly such a negative valence (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
I.94), when Dante is portrayed as crying out in fear because of the she-wolf.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 122.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Virgil's self-description as unworthy may reflect a similar self-description, that of \softline
John the Baptist.  See John1:27 and related discussion in Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia \softline
nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2   (Florence: Olschki, 1983), pp. 63, 71-73.  In this formulation Virgil is to \softline
Beatrice as John was to Christ.  For an earlier moment in Dante's writing that is based on exactly \softline
such a typological construction, one in which Guido Cavalcanti's Giovanna/John the Baptist is \softline
portrayed as the 'forerunner' to Dante's Beatrice/Christ, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f2  XXIV.3-4.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 125.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   For Cassell's consideration of the striking word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 ribellante}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Lectura Dantis \softline
Americana}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 "Inferno" I}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989), pp. 77-84.  His \softline
treatment of the way in which Dante thought of Virgil (much in the way that a long Christian \softline
tradition insisted of the Hebrews) as owing his faith to the true God has the result of making \softline
Virgil guilty of turning his back on a God whom he in some ways knew.  The problem with such a \softline
formulation is that it would make Virgil's placement in Limbo problematic -- he would have had \softline
to be placed deeper in hell, for such behavior would have been an active sin against God.  \softline
Nonetheless, it is also fair to say that most commentators dodge this troublesome word.  (See, for \softline
example, Bosco/Reggio, according to whom all that is meant here is that God will not allow \softline
Virgil to enter Paradise because he was born and lived a pagan and thus had no possibility of \softline
believing in Christ to come [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.124-126].  That is not a satisfying gloss to so strong a \softline
phrasing.)  For an attempt to find a difficult middle ground see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Il Virgilio dantesco: \softline
tragedia nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f2   (Florence: Olschki, 1983), pp. 145-51, and, perhaps more \softline
convincingly, Bortolo Martinelli, "Canto VII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Lectura Dantis Neapolitana: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f2  ed. \softline
Pompeo Giannantonio (Naples: Loffredo, 1989), pp. 157-58, distinguishing }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 rebellio lumini}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (Job \softline
24:13), an intentional and prideful act of hostility to God ('rebellion against the light') from a \softline
merely ignorant failure to have faith, as is the case with Virgil.  We should also remember that, \softline
within the fiction of the poem, this formulation is Virgil's own and may simply reflect his present \softline
sense of what he should have known when he was alive.  That is, Virgil may be exaggerating his \softline
culpability.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 132.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   'This harm' is Dante's present situation in the world; 'and worse' would be his \softline
damnation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 134-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Dante has apparently understood clearly enough that Virgil will lead him \softline
through hell and purgatory, but not paradise.  Having read the poem, we know that Beatrice will \softline
assume the role of guide for the first nine heavens.  Virgil seems to know this (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.122-123), \softline
but not Dante, who is aware only that some soul will take up the role of Virgil when his first \softline
guide leaves him.\par
}}