{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}
{\f3\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\s1 \qj _26;}
{\s2 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _25;}
{\s3 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _24;}
{\s4 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _23;}
{\s5 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _22;}
{\s6 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _21;}
{\s7 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _20;}
{\s8 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _19;}
{\s9 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _18;}
{\s10 \qj\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _17;}
{\s11 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _16;}
{\s12 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _15;}
{\s13 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _14;}
{\s14 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _13;}
{\s15 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _12;}
{\s16 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _11;}
{\s17 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _10;}
{\s18 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _9;}
{\s19 \qj\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _8;}
{\s20 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _7;}
{\s21 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _6;}
{\s22 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _5;}
{\s23 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _4;}
{\s24 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _3;}
{\s25 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _2;}
{\s26 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _1;}
{\s27 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz914\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 05}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-3.}{\plain \fs24   A descent again marks a border, this time between the Limbus and the second Circle \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.13).  Singleton (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.1) argues that the presence here of Minos in \softline
judgment indicates that 'real hell' begins only now, that Limbo is 'marginal.'  It is true, however, \softline
that the Limbus is inside the gate of hell.  Not only does 'real hell' begin there, it in a sense \softline
begins with those who are held outside the gate, the neutrals.  They are so pusillanimous that \softline
they are not even allowed 'a proper burial,' as it were.  One may not even say, as some have, that \softline
only with the second Circle do we begin to witness actual punishment being meted out for past \softline
sins, since the neutrals are indeed tormented by stinging insects as a fit punishment for their \softline
feckless conduct (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.65-66).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 4-5.}{\plain \fs24   Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.4) argues that the present tense of the verbs in this tercet \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i (sta}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i ringhia}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i essamina}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i giudica}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i manda}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i avvinghia}{\plain \fs24 ) reflects the continuous condition of Minos's \softline
behavior.  In fact }{\plain \fs24 \i all}{\plain \fs24  the verbs in the passage describing Minos's judgment, vv. 4-15, are in the \softline
present, as Dante leaves little doubt but that he wants his readers to imagine themselves -- unless \softline
a life of good conduct and God's grace combine to gain a better end -- coming before that \softline
judgment in the future.  This is the everlasting present of the moment of damnation, occurring, \softline
the text would make us feel, even as we read.  For a study of the historical present in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 , with attention (pp. 266-68) to this passage, see Edoardo Sanguineti ("Dante, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i praesens historicum}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24  10 [1958]), pp. 263-87.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Dante fairly often portrays infernal monsters and characters as having bestial traits.  For \softline
this particular one, canine vociferation, see also Cerberus (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VI.43), Plutus (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VII.43), \softline
Hecuba (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXX.20), Bocca degli Abati (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXII.105; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXII.108); Brutus and Cassius \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXIV (described as barking retrospectively at }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . VI.74).  See discussion in \softline
Barbara Spaggiari, "Antecedenti e modelli tipologici nella letteratura in lingua d'o{\f2 \'56}l," in }{\plain \fs24 \i I \softline
"monstra" nell'"Inferno" dantesco: tradizione e simbologie}{\plain \fs24  (Spoleto: Centro italiano di studi \softline
sull'alto medioevo, 1997), p. 112.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For the conflation here in the figure of Minos of the roles of Minos and of Rhadamanthus \softline
in Virgil's underworld, see Edward Moore, }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 , First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i Scripture and \softline
Classical Authors in Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 [1896]), pp. 183-84; the texts are found at \softline
Aeneid VI.432-433 and VI.566-569.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 6.}{\plain \fs24   Even the precise way that Minos winds his tail about himself is a subject in dispute.  \softline
Does he flap it back and forth as many times as he wishes to indicate the appropriate circle?  Or \softline
does he wind it like a vine around a tree?  See Mazzoni, "Il canto V dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno,}{\plain \fs24 " }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis \softline
Romana: Letture degli anni 1973-76}{\plain \fs24  (Rome: Bonacci, 1977), pp. 104-5, for a brief summary of \softline
the debate and reasons to prefer the second hypothesis.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 7.}{\plain \fs24   Sinners are 'ill-begotten' in that their end is this, eternal damnation, because of their \softline
sins (and not because their procreation in itself so fated them).  Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.7) \softline
points out that Dante himself is later described as 'bene nato' (well born) -- }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . V.115.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 8.}{\plain \fs24   See Raymond Benoit, "}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V," }{\plain \fs24 \i The Explicator}{\plain \fs24  41, 3 (1983), p. 2.  Dante presents \softline
Minos as a parody of a confessor meting out penance to a sinner.  The word }{\plain \fs24 \i confessa}{\plain \fs24  marks the \softline
beginning of this canto's concern with confession, which will be parodied again when Dante 
'confesses' Francesca (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.118-120).  For now we are perhaps meant to ruminate on the \softline
perversity of sinners.  In the world above they were offered, through this office of the Church, \softline
the possibility of confession and remission of sins.  We may infer that those sinners whom we \softline
find in Hell probably did not avail themselves of their great opportunity.  (We never hear the \softline
word 'confession' on the lips of any of them except for Guido da Montefeltro [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.83].  \softline
And he, having confessed and become a friar, then sins again and is condemned.  His second \softline
[and vain] confession is made, too late, to Dante.)  This moment offers a brief but cogent vision \softline
of human perversity: in their lives all those whom we see in hell had the opportunity to be rid of \softline
their sins by owning up to them in confession.  They apparently did not do so.  Here, in hell, \softline
what is the very first thing that they do?  They make full disclosure of their sins... to Minos.  \softline
Dante has apparently conflated the general function of Minos as judge of the dead in general \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . VI.432) and the role of Rhadamanthus as judge of the damned in particular (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . VI.566-569).  For the most recent discussion see Ignazio Baldelli, }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e Francesca}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, \softline
1999), pp. 5-6.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 9-12.}{\plain \fs24   The mechanical nature of Minos's judgment -- he is a judge who renders judgment \softline
with his tail, not his head -- underlines the lack of authority of the demons in hell: Minos is \softline
merely doing God's work.  Hell is presented as a perfectly functioning bureaucracy.  If some of \softline
Satan's minions are at times rebellious (e.g., the rebel angels in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IX, the winged demons in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXI-XXIII), they are so in vain.  Hell, too, is a part of God's kingdom.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 17.}{\plain \fs24   Once the narrated action of Dante's descent continues (it had been suspended at v. 3), \softline
the tense moves back to the past definite: 'Minos }{\plain \fs24 \i said}{\plain \fs24 .'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 18-19.}{\plain \fs24   Minos, seeing a rarity, to say the least -- a living man before him at the entrance \softline
to hell -- steals a moment from his incessant judgment to offer this warning.  How kindly are his \softline
intentions?  Most commentators seem to think he is the most 'humane' of the infernal demons, \softline
and even courteous to Dante.  However, and as Padoan points out (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.19), his \softline
calling into question, albeit indirectly, the competence of Virgil as guide ('beware... whom you \softline
trust'), is evidently meant to unsettle Dante.  He would obviously prefer not to have such visitors.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 20.}{\plain \fs24   Commentators customarily note that here Dante builds his line out of two sources: \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  VI.126: 'Facilis descensus Averno' (the }{\plain \fs24 \i descent}{\plain \fs24  to the underworld is easy [but not the \softline
return from there]); Matthew 7:13: 'spatiosa via est, quae ducit ad perditionem' (broad is the way \softline
that leads to perdition).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 21.}{\plain \fs24   The adverb }{\plain \fs24 \i pur}{\plain \fs24  in Virgil's response can be variously understood: as 'vainly' (with the \softline
sense of the Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i frustra}{\plain \fs24 ); as 'indeed' (in the sense of 'why do you persist in?'); as 'also' \softline
(reflecting Charon's similar shouting at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.84).  Our translation has tried to accommodate the \softline
first two possibilities.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 22-24.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil obviously understands that Minos's words were meant to scare Dante off \softline
(and perhaps he also understands the implicit insult to himself contained in them).  For the \softline
repetition here of the exact same verses (23 and 24) used to quell Charon's rebellious desires see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.95-96 and the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.95-96.  It seems clear that Virgil would not have used them \softline
again had they not been efficacious the first time, that is, had Charon not relented and rowed 
Dante across.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.136.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 25.}{\plain \fs24   Here the present tense is an example of the 'historical' (or 'vivid') present.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 26-33.}{\plain \fs24   The 'hellscape' that is established by the sounds in the darkness (once again \softline
Dante's eyes need to adjust to the deepening shadows) mates well with the sin of lust: darkness, \softline
passionate winds in conflict that bear their victims in unceasing agitation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b \tab 28-30.}{\plain \fs24   The dark and tempestuous 'hellscape' is a fit background for the sin of lust, \softline
carried out in darkness (at least in the common imagining) amidst the storms of passion.  For a \softline
passage that Dante surely knew and which might have had some effect on his shaping of this \softline
scene, see II Peter 2:10-22, the Apostle Peter's denunciation of the lustful.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28.}{\plain \fs24   It has become fashionable to speak of Dante's use of 'synaesthesia,' the blending of \softline
different sense impressions (see, e.g., Glauco Cambon, "Synaesthesia in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Divine Comedy}{\plain \fs24 ," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  88 [1970], pp. 3-5).  The term, however, was coined some 500 years later in \softline
literary history.  Dante would perhaps have referred to the trope rather as 'catachresis,' a daring, \softline
even 'improper,' comparison.  See Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24   \softline
(Florence: Olschki, 1983), pp. 66-67.  And see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  I.60 for a prior example.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 34.}{\plain \fs24   One of the most debated verses in this canto because of the words }{\plain \fs24 \i la ruina}{\plain \fs24  (literally, \softline
'the ruin').  What precisely do they mean?  Two attempts at evaluation of the commentary \softline
tradition are available, the first by Letterio Cassata, "Tre }{\plain \fs24 \i cruces}{\plain \fs24  dantesche: I. La }{\plain \fs24 \i ruina}{\plain \fs24  dei \softline
lussuriosi," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  48 (1971), pp. 5-14; the second, still more complete, by Nicol{\f2 \'62} \softline
Mineo (ED.1973.4, pp. 1056-57).  Mineo points out that there have been six identifiable schools \softline
of interpretation for the meaning of }{\plain \fs24 \i la ruina}{\plain \fs24 .  Unfortunately, there are severe problems \softline
associated with all of them.  Many American and some Italian students of the problem have been \softline
drawn to Singleton's solution (comms. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XII.32 and XII.36-45): Dante suppresses the \softline
meaning of the noun here only to reveal it at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XII.32-41, where }{\plain \fs24 \i questa ruina}{\plain \fs24  (verse 32) \softline
refers to the crack in the wall of hell made by the earthquake that accompanied Christ's \softline
crucifixion.  The resultant explanation is so attractive that even many of those who doubt its \softline
literal applicability do not wish to jettison it.  However, it does remain extremely dubious, as \softline
many rightly point out, that Dante would, for the only time in his poem, place the 'antecedent' \softline
necessary to a word's clear literal sense seven cantos after its first appearance.  A grammatical \softline
approach, however, yields still other difficulties.  Who are these people who are arriving 'before \softline
the ruin'?  Are they those who are being driven on the wind in the preceding tercet \softline
(grammatically the most probable reading)?  If that is true, Dante would at least seem to be \softline
contradicting what he will shortly say (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.44-45), namely that the sinners in this circle have \softline
no hope of any change in their condition.  However, what he says there is only that their plight \softline
will never be ameliorated -- a phrasing that might allow for its aggravation, as we would be \softline
witnessing here.  Others, most trenchantly Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.34), attempt a difficult \softline
argument: the antecedent for the suffering souls in this verse is not in the preceding line, but all \softline
the way back at v. 13: the }{\plain \fs24 \i molte}{\plain \fs24  (many shades) who assemble for the judgment of Minos.  The \softline
result of this interpretation is, as is the case for Singleton's, welcome but unlikely: we have a \softline
'flashback,' as it were, to what happens when the }{\plain \fs24 \i newly}{\plain \fs24  arrived souls (not the ones we have just \softline
been observing) first reach this depth.  And so that solution, too, seems dubious on grammatical 
grounds.  If one, like Mazzoni ("Il canto V dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno,}{\plain \fs24 " }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis Romana: Letture degli \softline
anni 1973-76}{\plain \fs24  [Rome: Bonacci, 1977]), pp. 106-8, lets the proximity of grammatical antecedents \softline
have its due weight, one not only thinks that the antecedent of the subject of the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i giungono}{\plain \fs24  is \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i li spirti}{\plain \fs24  or }{\plain \fs24 \i li}{\plain \fs24  in the preceding tercet, but that the antecedent of the noun }{\plain \fs24 \i ruina}{\plain \fs24  is the noun \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i bufera}{\plain \fs24  (the hellish squall) in that tercet.  And then, again following Mazzoni, one argues that the \softline
meaning here is not 'ruin,' but the secondary meaning of the word, 'fury, violence.'  One \softline
immediately sees, however, the problem with this solution as well -- Mazzoni is forced to argue \softline
for the same position embraced by Padoan: the action described is that which occurs when the \softline
sinners }{\plain \fs24 \i first}{\plain \fs24  reach this circle (immediately after vv. 13-15), and not that which is habitual and \softline
indeed eternal (vv. 25-33).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ), pp. 80-81, discusses (and \softline
firmly rejects) the late and decidedly inadmissible reading }{\plain \fs24 \i deventi}{\plain \fs24  [= 'di venti'] }{\plain \fs24 \i la ruina}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The position of a translator who does not have a clear idea of what the original means is \softline
an impossible one.  We chose the path taken by Mazzoni, translating }{\plain \fs24 \i ruina}{\plain \fs24  as 'violence,' before \softline
we consulted his work.  The main reason for doing so is grammatical: all the verb tenses of this \softline
scene that describe the actions or reactions of the sinners are in the present (vv. 25-27; 29-36).  \softline
Thus it seems incorrect to attempt to mark a temporal shift in the action that is not reflected in \softline
the text.  If the tense of the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i giungono}{\plain \fs24  were past instead of present, Mazzoni's solution would \softline
seem optimal.  But there is no instance of a single variant of the verb in the manuscript tradition.  \softline
Thus, as things stand, there seems to be no optimal solution.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 39.}{\plain \fs24   For a probable source for this line see Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i Il canto VI dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24  in }{\plain \fs24 \i Nuove \softline
letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1967]), p. 13, n. 2; "Il canto V dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno,}{\plain \fs24 " }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura \softline
Dantis Romana: Letture degli anni 1973-76}{\plain \fs24  (Rome: Bonacci, 1977), pp. 108-9: the }{\plain \fs24 \i Tresor}{\plain \fs24  of \softline
Brunetto Latini (II.20), in the chapter on chastity: 'On doit contrester au desirier de delit; car ki \softline
se laisse vaincre, }{\plain \fs24 \i la raison remaint sous le desirier}{\plain \fs24 ....  Par quoi on se doit estudiier }{\plain \fs24 \i que raisons \softline
soit sor la concupiscence}{\plain \fs24 , en tel maniere que l'un et l'autre desirent de bien faire.'  And then, \softline
further along (II.41): 'Et non chastes }{\plain \fs24 \i est cil ki sousmet soi mesmes au delit...}{\plain \fs24 ' (Mazzoni's italics).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 40-49.}{\plain \fs24   The first two similes of the canto (and see the third one, }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.82-85) associate \softline
the lustful with birds, a natural association given their condition, driven by the wind, and one in \softline
accord with the view that lust is the property of beings less than human, and indeed frequently of \softline
birds.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 40-43.}{\plain \fs24   The first vast group of the 'ordinary' lovers (T. S. Eliot's typist and house agent's \softline
clerk in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Waste Land}{\plain \fs24 , vv. 222-248, would eventually be assigned here, one imagines) is \softline
compared to a flock of starlings, with their ragged, darting, sky-covering flight on a winter's day.  \softline
For the Virgilian source, see }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  VI.311-312.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-49.}{\plain \fs24   The group in the second simile of the canto is more select, the 'stars' of lustful \softline
living.  Where the starlings are as though without individual identities, the 'masses' of the lustful, \softline
as it were, each of these has a particularity and a certain fame, and is thus worthy of being \softline
treated as exemplary.  (For a discussion of exemplary literature in the middle ages see Carlo \softline
Delcorno, }{\plain \fs24 \i Exemplum e letteratura tra medioevo e rinascimento}{\plain \fs24  (Bologna: Il Mulino, 1989, with \softline
special attention to Dante, pp. 195-227.)  Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.47), on the other hand, \softline
suggests that this second group is distinguished from the first on moral grounds, since they all 
died by their own hand or at the hand of others, and are as a result more heavily punished.  The \softline
evidence for such a view does not seem present in the text.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For the cranes see Virgil, }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  X.264-266 as well as Statius, }{\plain \fs24 \i Thebaid}{\plain \fs24  V.11-16.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The rhyme words }{\plain \fs24 \i lai}{\plain \fs24  and }{\plain \fs24 \i guai}{\plain \fs24  suggest a relationship between the French tradition of love \softline
songs (Padoan, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.46) and its Italian equivalent.  The cranes are imagined as \softline
singing their sad songs of love much as these sinners are presented as drawing sighs of love-sickness, their 'poetry,' as it were.  For }{\plain \fs24 \i lai}{\plain \fs24  as a term used by the Proven{\f1\u231\'e7}al poets for the laments \softline
of amorous birds see Ferdinando Neri, "La voce }{\plain \fs24 \i lai}{\plain \fs24  nei testi italiani," }{\plain \fs24 \i Atti della Reale Accademia \softline
delle Scienze di Torino, classe di scienze morali, storiche e filologiche}{\plain \fs24  72 (1937), pp. 105-19.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-67.}{\plain \fs24   This is the second important 'catalogue' that we find in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 .  The first was the \softline
forty identified inhabitants of Limbo (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.102 -- at the end of that note).  In the \softline
circle of lust we find these seven identified sinners and two more: Francesca and Paolo, who \softline
bring the total to nine.  As Curtius argued quite some time ago, given the importance for Dante \softline
of the number nine (the 'number' of his beloved Beatrice), it seems likely that these nine souls \softline
who died for love are associated with her by opposition (Ernst Robert Curtius, }{\plain \fs24 \i European \softline
Literature and the Latin Middle Ages}{\plain \fs24 , tr. W. R. Trask [New York: Harper & Row, 1963 (1948)], \softline
p. 369).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab It is also notable that Dante's catalogues are unlike (and pronouncedly so in this case) \softline
later humanist catalogues of the famous, which thrive on additions, in display of the most arrant \softline
'erudition': }{\plain \fs24 \i the more the better}{\plain \fs24  seems to be the motto of such writers.  Dante, on the other hand, \softline
frequently sculpts his groupings to a purpose.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab One of the insistent poetic }{\plain \fs24 \i topoi}{\plain \fs24  that we find in medieval writers -- and certainly in Dante \softline
-- is that of }{\plain \fs24 \i translatio}{\plain \fs24 .  This is the notion that certain ideas or institutions have their major \softline
manifestations in movement through historical time and space.  The two most usually deployed \softline
examples of this }{\plain \fs24 \i topos}{\plain \fs24  are }{\plain \fs24 \i translatio imperii}{\plain \fs24  (the movement of imperial greatness from Troy to \softline
Rome to 'new Rome' -- wherever that may be in a given patriotic writer's imagination [in Dante's \softline
case the empireless Rome of his own day]) and }{\plain \fs24 \i translatio studii}{\plain \fs24  (the devlopment of serious \softline
intellectual pursuit from its birth in Athens, to its rebirth in Rome, to its new home [Paris, \softline
according to some, in Dante's day]).  It is perhaps useful to think of Dante's catalogues as \softline
reflecting a similar sense of history, of movement through time and space.  In this one we have \softline
three triads: Semiramis, Dido, Cleopatra: lustful queens of the African coast; Helen, Achilles, \softline
Paris: Greek and Trojan lovers whose lusts brought down a kingdom; Tristan; Francesca, Paolo: \softline
a man caught up in destructive passion in King Mark's court in Cornwall, as we move into \softline
Europe and toward the present; and, finally, lovers from the recent past in Rimini, here in Italy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58.}{\plain \fs24   Semiramis was the legendary queen of Assyria (Dante has confused the name of her \softline
capital, Babylon, forthat of the Egyptian city, and thus misplaced her realm). She was supposed \softline
to have legalized incest in order to carry out her sexual liaison with her son.  For more about \softline
Semiramis, see Irene Samuel, "Semiramis in the Middle Age: The History of a Legend," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Medievalia et Humanistica}{\plain \fs24  2 (1944), pp. 32-44; see also Marianne Shapiro, "Semiramis in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V," }{\plain \fs24 \i Romance Notes}{\plain \fs24  16 (1975), pp. 455-56.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 61-62.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's use of periphrasis (circumlocution) represents one of his favored \softline
'teaching techniques,' in which he (generally, but certainly not always) offers his readers fairly \softline
easy problems to solve.  There is not, it seems reasonable to believe, a single commentator (or 
student?) who has ever got this one 'wrong.'  Use of periphrasis has a second effect: it tends to \softline
emphasize the importance of the person or thing so presented.  The 'Dido' that we scribble in our \softline
margins stands out from the page, partly because it is we who have supplied the name.  That \softline
Dido is the quintessential presence in this 'flock' is underlined by }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno }{\plain \fs24 V.85, where she is the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i only}{\plain \fs24  named presence in it, having previously been alluded to only indirectly.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For consideration of the similarity of Dante's treatment of Dido here to that found \softline
previously in one of the }{\plain \fs24 \i rime petrose}{\plain \fs24  ("Cos{\f2 \'58} nel mio parlar," vv. 35-43) see Lino Pertile, "Il \softline
modo di Paolo," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Miscellanea di studi offerta dall'Universit{\f2 \'42} di Urbino a Claudio Varese per i \softline
suoi novantanni}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Giorgio Cerboni Baiardi (Manziana [Rome]: Vecchiarelli Editore, 2001),  p. \softline
630.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 61.}{\plain \fs24   Dido's presence here frequently upsets readers who think that she ought to be found \softline
in canto XIII, since she committed suicide.  It is clear that Dante thinks of the psychology of sin \softline
with a certain sophistication, isolating the impulse, the deeper motive, that drives our actions \softline
from the actions themselves.  In Dido's case this is her uncontrolled desire for Aeneas.  She does \softline
not kill herself from despair (as do the suicides in the thirteenth canto), but rather to give \softline
expression to her need for her lover -- or so Dante would seem to have believed.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 62.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's similar one-line description of Dido's 'infidelity' occurs at }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  IV.552.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 63.}{\plain \fs24   For Dante's knowledge that Cleopatra committed suicide by having an asp bite her, \softline
see }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . VI.76-78.  And see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno }{\plain \fs24 V.61 for a discussion of that other famous \softline
suicide, Dido, also placed }{\plain \fs24 \i here}{\plain \fs24  for her wantonness rather than relegated to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIII for \softline
having committed suicide.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 65.}{\plain \fs24   It is important to remember that Dante, Greekless, had not read Homer, who only \softline
became available in Latin translation much later in the fourteenth century.  His Achilles is not \softline
the hero of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Iliad}{\plain \fs24  known to some of us, but the warrior-lover portrayed by Statius and others.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 67.}{\plain \fs24   For }{\plain \fs24 \i mille}{\plain \fs24  (one thousand) here and elsewhere in the poem see Baldelli, }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e \softline
Francesca}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1999), p. 25n.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 69-72.  di nostra vita}{\plain \fs24 .  The echo of the first line of the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.1) is probably not \softline
coincidental.  Dante was lost 'midway in the journey of our life' and, we will later learn, some of \softline
his most besetting problems arose from misplaced affection.  He was, indeed, near death as a \softline
result of his transgressions.  The repetition of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i smarrito}{\plain \fs24  to describe Dante's distraught \softline
condition also recalls the first tercet of the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.3).  Here we can see an emerging pattern \softline
in his re-use of key words from previous contexts in order to enhance the significance of a \softline
current situation in the poem.  See also }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  II.63-64, where the words }{\plain \fs24 \i cammin}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i paura}{\plain \fs24 , and \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i smarrito}{\plain \fs24  join to reflect, looking backward, upon the terrifying situation in which the protagonist \softline
found himself at the poem's opening (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.1-6).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 71.}{\plain \fs24   Dante refers to the great figures of the olden days with strikingly anachronistic \softline
terms, the medieval 'ladies and knights' emphasizing the continuity of the historical record.  No \softline
'humanist' writer would be likely to use such a locution that so dramatically erases the gap \softline
between classical antiquity and the present age.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 72.}{\plain \fs24   For a division of the parts of the canto, following that made by Lanfranco Caretti (}{\plain \fs24 \i Il \softline
canto di Francesca}{\plain \fs24  [Lucca: Lucentia, 1951]) and then expanding it, see Mazzoni ("Il canto V \softline
dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno,}{\plain \fs24 " }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis Romana: Letture degli anni 1973-76}{\plain \fs24  [Rome: Bonacci, 1977]), pp. \softline
99-100.  Mazzoni claims that the canto is divided into two precise halves (vv. 1-71; 72-142) and \softline
that these are then divided into seven parallel scenes or moments.  It is surely true that the rest of \softline
the canto -- its second half -- is devoted mainly and essentially to Francesca.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 74.}{\plain \fs24   To be 'light upon the wind' is, to some readers, a sign of Francesca's and Paolo's \softline
noble ability to triumph over their dismal surroundings; to others, it indicates that they are driven \softline
even more wildly than some other shades by the winds of passion.  This first detail begins a \softline
series of challenging phrasings that invite the reader to consider closely the ambiguities of the \softline
entire episode.  For a summary of the issues at stake here, see Mazzoni, "Il canto V dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno,}{\plain \fs24 " \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis Romana: Letture degli anni 1973-76}{\plain \fs24  (Rome: Bonacci, 1977), pp. 124-28.  And \softline
for a thorough consideration of the history of interpretation of the episode of Francesca see A. E. \softline
Quaglio, 'Francesca' (ED.1971.3), pp. 1-13.  For the background of political intrigue that informs \softline
this episode see Teodolinda Barolini, "Dante and Francesca da Rimini: Realpolitik, Romance, \softline
Gender," }{\plain \fs24 \i Speculum}{\plain \fs24  75 (2000), pp. 1-28.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 76-78.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's only complete tercet in the second half of the canto (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
V.111) is laconic, as though he were aware of the emotions felt by Dante (which he himself had \softline
so devastatingly presented in }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  IV, the story of love's destructive power over Dido) and \softline
realized there was nothing he had said or could say that might rein in his excited pupil.  Paola \softline
Marconi ("'per quello amor che i mena': }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V, 78 e il }{\plain \fs24 \i Roman de Tristan}{\plain \fs24  de B{\f1\u233\'e9}roul," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i L{\u8219\'27}Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  20 [2002], pp. 77-93) argues that Dante's depiction of the lovers as being 'led' by love \softline
is rooted in the earliest French versions of }{\plain \fs24 \i Tristan}{\plain \fs24 , which may have circulated in Italy and been \softline
known to Dante.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 80.}{\plain \fs24   The protagonist's adjective for the two sinners (they are 'anime }{\plain \fs24 \i affannate}{\plain \fs24 ') may well \softline
be meant to remind us of the only other time we find that adjective in the first }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24 , at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  \softline
I.22, when Dante is described as being like a man who has escaped from the sea 'with laboring \softline
breath' (}{\plain \fs24 \i con lena affannata}{\plain \fs24 ).  If that is true, it further binds the character's sense of identity with \softline
these sinners.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 82-84.}{\plain \fs24   The third simile involving birds in this canto (and there are only three similes in \softline
it) compares the two lovers to doves.  As Shoaf, in "Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i colombi}{\plain \fs24  and the Figuralism of Hope \softline
in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Divine Comedy}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  93 (1975), pp. 27-59, has demonstrated, there is a 'dove \softline
program' in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24 , beginning with the Venereal doves reflected here, passing through the \softline
dove-simile in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  II (vv. 124-129), and finishing in the reference to James and Peter as \softline
'doves' of the Holy Spirit in }{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24  XXV (vv. 19-21).  Dante's nest-seeking doves seem to \softline
reflect both }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  V.213-217 and }{\plain \fs24 \i Georgics}{\plain \fs24  I.414.  A student at Princeton, Daniel Cheely '03, \softline
has recently suggested that another Virgilian passage is echoed here: }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  II.516, the \softline
description of Hecuba and her daughters, huddled together like doves driven before a black \softline
stormcloud.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For a wider treatment of the birds referred to in this canto see Lawrence Ryan, "}{\plain \fs24 \i Stornei, \softline
Gru, Colombe}{\plain \fs24 : The Bird Images in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  94 (1976), pp. 25-45.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 85.}{\plain \fs24   See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V.61-62.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 86. }{\plain \fs24  On the Virgilian context and possible consequent effect of Dante's word }{\plain \fs24 \i maligno}{\plain \fs24 , see \softline
Paola Rigo, "Tra 'maligno' e 'sanguigno,'" in her }{\plain \fs24 \i Memoria classica e memoria biblica in Dante}{\plain \fs24  \softline
(Florence: Olschki, 1994 [1989]), pp. 45-48.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 88.}{\plain \fs24   The beginning of Francesca's highly rhetorical speech reflects the tradition of \softline
classical rhetoric that would have a speaker first seek to gain the sympathy of the audience, a \softline
device referred to as }{\plain \fs24 \i captatio benevolentiae}{\plain \fs24 , the capturing of the goodwill of one's auditors.  For \softline
noteworthy earlier examples of }{\plain \fs24 \i captatio}{\plain \fs24  see Beatrice's first words to Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . II.58-60) and \softline
Virgil's first words to her in return (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . II.76-81).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 91-93.}{\plain \fs24   Francesca's locutions are revealing and instructive: God is portrayed as having \softline
turned away from the two lovers, while Dante is welcomed for not having done so, for feeling \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i piet{\f2 \'42}}{\plain \fs24  for them.  This canto has one of its 'key words' in }{\plain \fs24 \i amore}{\plain \fs24 , which occurs fully eleven times \softline
in it (vv. 61, 66, 69, 78, 100, 103, 106, 119, 125, 128, 134).  But this word, 'pity,' is crucial as \softline
well (vv. 72, 93, 117, 140, and, in the continuing action of the next canto, VI, 2).  Dante is filled \softline
with pity for lost lovers.  Should he be?  That may be the central question facing a reader of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V (see further discussion, below, in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.142).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 91.}{\plain \fs24   For the source of this verse in Cavalcanti's line 'Se Merc{\f1\u233\'e9} fosse amica a' miei disiri' \softline
see Contini, }{\plain \fs24 \i Un' idea di Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Turin: Einaudi, 1976), p. 155 (cited by Mazzoni ["Il canto V \softline
dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno,}{\plain \fs24 " }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis Romana: Letture degli anni 1973-76}{\plain \fs24  (Rome: Bonacci, 1977)], pp. \softline
121, 140).  See Barolini, "Dante and Cavalcanti (On Making Distinctions in Matters of Love): \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V in Its Lyric Context," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  116 (1998), pp. 31-63, for a discussion of the lyric \softline
precursors (especially Guido Cavalcanti and the resonances of this tradition in the younger Dante \softline
himself) who give a shaping form to the lyric proceedings in this fifth canto.  Nicol{\f2 \'62} Pasero, \softline
"Dante in Cavalcanti: ancora sui rapporti tra }{\plain \fs24 \i Vita nova}{\plain \fs24  e }{\plain \fs24 \i Donna me prega}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24  \softline
22 (1998), pp. 388-414, offers a review of the current raging argument over the complex and \softline
unhappy relations between Guido and Dante that resulted from their very different views of the \softline
nature of a poet's necessary treatment of the subject of love.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 96.}{\plain \fs24   The three main editorial constructions of this contested phrase of Francesca are as \softline
follows: it reads either (1) }{\plain \fs24 \i si tace}{\plain \fs24  (becomes silent); or (2a) }{\plain \fs24 \i ci tace}{\plain \fs24  (grows quiet here); or (2b) }{\plain \fs24 \i ci \softline
tace}{\plain \fs24  (grows quiet for our sake).  Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ), pp. \softline
88-89, argues strongly for (2a), noting that }{\plain \fs24 \i ci}{\plain \fs24  is the }{\plain \fs24 \i lectio difficilior}{\plain \fs24  and accepting the views of \softline
Barbi, }{\plain \fs24 \i Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24  (Florence: Sansoni, 1934) pp. 263-64: }{\plain \fs24 \i ci}{\plain \fs24  in early Italian, \softline
more than in modern, was generally used to mean 'here'; the wind is quieter where Dante and \softline
Virgil are placed to observe the lustful, and Francesca takes note of this fact.  That is a sensible \softline
understanding, but either of the others might have been what Dante wrote.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 97.}{\plain \fs24   For the Italian text with an English translation of Boccaccio's Francesca-favoring \softline
narrative, in his }{\plain \fs24 \i Esposizioni}{\plain \fs24 , see Singleton, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.97.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 100-106.}{\plain \fs24   The use of anaphora (repetition) here at the beginning of each tercet, 'Amor... \softline
Amor... Amor...,' underlines the rhetorical skill of Francesca, who presses her case with listening 
Dante: it was Love's fault that she and Paolo fell into carnal passion.  'Amor' appears three times \softline
as the first word in a tercet after an end-stopped line and thus must be capitalized.  It seems also \softline
reasonable to believe that Francesca is here referring to her 'god,' the Lord of Love, Cupid, \softline
whose name is 'Amor.'  He is the only god she seems to own, since, by her account (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.91), \softline
the 'King of the universe' is not her friend.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 102.}{\plain \fs24   Against Pagliaro (}{\plain \fs24 \i Ulisse}{\plain \fs24 : }{\plain \fs24 \i ricerche semantiche sulla "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Messina-Florence: D'Anna, 1967]), pp. 136-49, who argues that Francesca is referring to the way in \softline
which she was made to fall in love, Padoan (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.101) argues persuasively that she \softline
refers in fact to the brutal manner of her death.  This verse is much debated.  Padoan has recently \softline
returned to the argument, reinforcing his claims (}{\plain \fs24 \i Il lungo cammino del "Poema sacro": studi \softline
danteschi}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Olschki, 1993], pp. 189-200).  See also the strong arguments of Chiavacci \softline
Leonardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno, con il commento di A. M. C. L. }{\plain \fs24 [Milan: Mondadori, 1991]),  pp. 168-69.  As \softline
much as we may agree with this view of the matter, we must also acknowledge that the wording \softline
of the text allows, in itself, either interpretation.  Our translation therefore leaves the meaning \softline
ambiguous, as does, indeed, the original, whatever Dante's intentions.  Since these words were \softline
written, Lino Pertile ("Il modo di Paolo," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Miscellanea di studi offerta dall'Universit{\f2 \'42} di \softline
Urbino a Claudio Varese per i suoi novantanni}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Giorgio Cerboni Baiardi [Manziana (Rome): \softline
Vecchiarelli Editore, 2001]), pp. 623-33, has produced a response to Padoan's arguments that is \softline
perhaps even more convincing than they are.  Basing his argument in Italian and Latin texts \softline
[among the latter especially Andreas Capellanus's }{\plain \fs24 \i De amore}{\plain \fs24 ], Pertile demonstrates that }{\plain \fs24 \i modo}{\plain \fs24  \softline
[Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i modus}{\plain \fs24 ] frequently meant 'measure' when it referred to the immoderate nature of \softline
passionate love.  He summarizes his sense of the verse as follows: 'il modo, la misura, la forza \softline
dell'amore di Paolo ancora mi ferisce, mi affligge, mi soggioga' [the manner, or measure, or \softline
force of Paolo's love still wounds, or afflicts, or dominates me]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 103.}{\plain \fs24   The }{\plain \fs24 \i dicta}{\plain \fs24  of Andreas Capellanus are often cited as lying behind Francesca's speech \softline
(e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i De amore}{\plain \fs24  II, 8): 'Amor nil posset amori denegare' (Love can deny love nothing at all).  A \softline
closer parallel exists between a line in a love poem by Cino da Pistoia and this one: 'A nullo \softline
amato amar perdona amore' (cited by Enrico Mestica [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.103-105]).  But we do not \softline
know if Dante is echoing Cino or Cino, Dante.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 104.}{\plain \fs24   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i piacer}{\plain \fs24  refers to the physical attractiveness of Paolo, as most \softline
commentators agree.  See, recently, Chiavacci Leonardi: '}{\plain \fs24 \i piacere }{\plain \fs24 vale "cosa che piace", e quindi \softline
"bellezza"...' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno, con il commento di A. M. C. L. }{\plain \fs24 [Milan: Mondadori, 1991]), pp. 157-58).  \softline
For the verbal noun }{\plain \fs24 \i piacere}{\plain \fs24  in Dante see Ugo Vignuzzi's entry 'piacere' (ED.1973.4), pp. 468-70.  \softline
There has been dispute over the exact meaning of the word here since the fourteenth century.  \softline
Most modern commentators, e.g., Bosco/Reggio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.104), agree that Francesca was \softline
taken by the physical beauty of Paolo ('la bellezza di costui'), as he was by hers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 105.}{\plain \fs24   See Virgil, }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  VI.444; Daniello was perhaps the first to make note of this echo \softline
(comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.105).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 106.}{\plain \fs24   The verse describing 'the love that leads to death' contains a 'visual pun' on the \softline
theme, as was pointed out by a graduate student at Princeton, Laura Kellogg, in 1989: 'AMOR \softline
condusse noi ad unA MORte.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 107.}{\plain \fs24   Francesca, whose chief rhetorical strategy is to remove as much blame from herself \softline
as she is able, finding other forces at fault wherever possible (e.g., Paolo's physical beauty, her \softline
despicable husband, the allure of a French romance), here tries to even the score with her \softline
husband.  She may be damned, but he, as the killer of his wife and brother, will be much lower \softline
down, in the ninth circle.  Since Gianciotto, who killed them in 1283-84, lived until 1304, his \softline
shade could not be seen by Dante in Caina.  We have, as a result, no basis on which to question \softline
her opinion.  However, had Dante wanted to guarantee it, it would have taken a line or so to do \softline
just that -- and he does several times have sinners tell of the impending arrival of still others in a \softline
given circle in ways that clearly call for acceptance (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXII.54-69).  And so \softline
we are left wondering at Francesca's remark, and should at least keep this question open.  It \softline
seems better to view her prediction as a wish stated as a fact than as a fact.  This is to support the \softline
interpretation of Pier Angelo Perotti, "Caina attende," }{\plain \fs24 \i L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  2 (1993), pp. 129-34.  \softline
However, for an example of the continuing view that accepts Francesca's predictive placement of \softline
her husband in hell see Ignazio Baldelli, "Dante, i Guidi e i Malatesta," }{\plain \fs24 \i Annali della Scuola \softline
Normale Superiore di Pisa}{\plain \fs24 , serie 3, 18 (1988), p. 1070, a judgment that he has reaffirmed in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e Francesca}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1999), pp. 55-56.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Iannucci suggests that Gianciotto may have been conceived by Dante as being misshapen \softline
and lame like Vulcan, the cuckolded husband of Venus (see his "Forbidden Love: Metaphor and \softline
History," }{\plain \fs24 \i Annali della Facolt{\f2 \'42} di}{\plain \fs24  }{\plain \fs24 \i Lettere e Filosofia, Universit{\f2 \'42} di Siena}{\plain \fs24  11 [1980], p. 345).\par
}\sect \sectd \sbknone\margrsxn1350\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pndec\pnstart1}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta )}}

\pard \fs24\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640
{\plain \fs24 \tab Petrocchi is harshly polemical against those who have argued that this verse is spoken by \softline
Paolo (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ), p. 90.  It is indeed difficult to imagine \softline
that this rhetorically perfect speech could suddenly turn into a 'chorus' without the poet having \softline
given some very clear indication that such was the case.  The next verse, 'These words were borne \softline
from them to us,' does not necessarily mean that they were }{\plain \fs24 \i spoken}{\plain \fs24  by both lovers, only that they \softline
come from where they where, reminding us that we always see them together.  As Benvenuto \softline
(comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.108) and Boccaccio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.106-108) both insist, Francesca is \softline
speaking for herself }{\plain \fs24 \i and}{\plain \fs24  for Paolo.  However, for a return to the notion that this last line is \softline
spoken, not by Francesca, but by Paolo, see Gorni ("Francesca e Paolo: La voce di lui," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Intersezioni}{\plain \fs24  16 [1996]), pp. 383-90.  It is difficult to accept such a view, since Dante is almost \softline
always carefully precise in separating one speaker's words from another's.  And while punctuation \softline
in the manuscript tradition is not (and cannot be) reliable, it nonetheless seems odd that no one \softline
else had treated the line this way, which in fact seems more ingenious than sensible; that would at \softline
least suggest that, from the beginning, there have been no manscripts that gave the line to \softline
Francesca's lover.  Further, for Paolo to enter the fray in this single (and petulant? [if it is his only \softline
vengeful utterance]) outburst essentially destroys the effect of Francesca's climactic words, \softline
drawing attention from her just before she falls silent.  And it is clear from what follows that it is \softline
she who is much on Dante's mind, not Paolo.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 109-117.}{\plain \fs24   These nine verses contain the 'drama' of the canto }{\plain \fs24 \i in nuce}{\plain \fs24 .  Dante's pensive \softline
condition in the first tercet reflects his being moved deeply by Francesca's beautiful speech; \softline
Virgil attempts to spur him to thoughtful appreciation of what he has seen and heard; the second \softline
tercet records his more emotional than rational outburst: he is totally sympathetic to the lovers, \softline
and now, in the third, he turns to tell Francesca that he is filled with pity for her.  She has won \softline
him over.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Some twenty years ago Dante's tearful state (v. 117) reminded Elizabeth Raymond and \softline
Susan Saltrick (both Princeton '78) of the tears Augustine shed for Dido -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i Confessions}{\plain \fs24  I.13.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 114.}{\plain \fs24   Padoan argues effectively (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.114), against the more widespread \softline
opinion, that the phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i al doloroso passo}{\plain \fs24  (to this woeful pass) refers to spiritual damnation rather \softline
than to physical death.  Chiavacci Leonardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno, con il commento di A. M. C. L. }{\plain \fs24 [Milan: \softline
Mondadori, 1991]), p. 160, reproposes the gloss of Francesco da Buti (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.114), \softline
which asserts that the phrase simultaneously recalls their sin, the moment of their death, and their \softline
subsequent damnation.  Padoan's solution seems the more economical and in keeping with the \softline
protagonist's view of the two sinners, here circling forever on the black winds of hell.  The word \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i doloroso}{\plain \fs24  may reflect the }{\plain \fs24 \i dolenti note}{\plain \fs24 , the agonized cries of the damned in this circle (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.25), \softline
as well as look forward to the }{\plain \fs24 \i dolore}{\plain \fs24  of the first verse of Francesca's second speech (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.121), \softline
the sorrow that she now feels in hell remembering her past happiness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 118-120.}{\plain \fs24   In 1972 Georgia Nugent, then a student at Princeton, pointed out that Dante's \softline
question mimics the questions used by confessors to ascertain the nature of a penitent's sins.  \softline
Here, we may reflect, Dante is behaving more like a priest in the so-called 'religion of Love' than \softline
like a Christian confessor.  See the earlier discussion of confession in this canto, in the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V.8.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 121-126.}{\plain \fs24   'This [the first tercet] imitates Virgil... but literally translates Bo{\f1\u235\'eb}tius' (cited \softline
from J. Taaffe, }{\plain \fs24 \i A Comment on the "Divine Comedy" of Dante Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  [London, John Murray, \softline
1822] p. 326).  See the }{\plain \fs24 \i Consolation of Philosophy}{\plain \fs24  II, pr. 4: 'in omni adversitate fortunae \softline
infelicissimum est genus infortunii fuisse felicem' (among fortune's many adversities the most \softline
unhappy kind is once to have been happy).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For the Virgilian resonances (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . II.3-13), see the fairly detailed account in Hollander, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1969), pp. 110-11.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 123.}{\plain \fs24   There is debate as to whether the word }{\plain \fs24 \i dottore}{\plain \fs24  (here 'teacher') refers to Boethius or \softline
Virgil.  Most prefer the second hypothesis, but see Baldelli, }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e Francesca}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, \softline
1999), p. 63.  We should realize that either choice forces upon us a somewhat ungainly \softline
hypothesis, the first that Francesca knows Boethius well (it is only several years since Dante had \softline
characterized the }{\plain \fs24 \i Consolation of Philosophy}{\plain \fs24  as a work known only to few [at }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24  II.xii.2]), \softline
the second that she recognizes the Roman poet Virgil without having had him identified by \softline
Dante.  Since Virgil is referred to by Dante as 'il mio dottore' in this very canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.70), and \softline
since we have visited his 'sorrow' a single canto earlier, where we learn what causes the virtuous \softline
pagans their unending unhappiness, it seems the wiser choice to accept the notion that Dante, \softline
taking advantage of poetic license, allows Francesca to recognize Virgil.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 127-128.}{\plain \fs24   Much has been written on the Old French sources of this scene.  Work in \softline
English includes articles by Davy Carozza, "Elements of the }{\plain \fs24 \i roman courtois}{\plain \fs24  in the Episode of \softline
Paolo and Francesca (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V)," }{\plain \fs24 \i Papers on Language and Literature}{\plain \fs24  3 (1967), pp. 291-301, and \softline
Donald Maddox, "The Arthurian Intertexts of }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  114 (1996), pp. 113-27.  \softline
And for a possible link to the love story of Eloise and Abelard see Peter Dronke, "Francesca and \softline
H{\f1\u233\'e9}loise," }{\plain \fs24 \i Comparative Literature}{\plain \fs24  27 (1975), pp. 113-35.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 132.}{\plain \fs24   Francesca's account of her and Paolo's conquest by Amor is 'corrected' by a later \softline
text, Dante's reference to God as the 'punto che mi vinse' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XXX.11), where Dante is, like \softline
Paolo, 'constrained' by love (}{\plain \fs24 \i strinse}{\plain \fs24  [v. 128]; }{\plain \fs24 \i Par. }{\plain \fs24 XXX.15: }{\plain \fs24 \i amor mi costrinse}{\plain \fs24 ) -- but his desire is 
for Beatrice, not for a fleshly liaison.  The passage in }{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24  is clearly meant to reflect \softline
negatively, not only on the amorous activity of Francesca and Paolo, but on the protagonist's \softline
reactions to it.  The god of Love and Francesca are being played against God and Beatrice -- or so \softline
we will understand once we reach the last }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24 .  For the resonance of this self-citation see \softline
Hollander, "Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24  and the Classical Tradition: the Case of Virgil," in }{\plain \fs24 \i The "Divine \softline
Comedy" and the Encyclopedia of Arts and Sciences: Acta of the International Dante Symposium, \softline
13-16 November 1983, Hunter College, New York}{\plain \fs24 , ed. G. Di Scipio and A. Scaglione \softline
(Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1988), pp. 7-8, discussing the contributions of Contini (}{\plain \fs24 \i Un' idea di \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24  [Turin: Einaudi, 1976]), p. 206; Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Olschki, 1983]), pp. 139-40; and Dronke ("Symbolism and Structure in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24  30," }{\plain \fs24 \i Romance Philology}{\plain \fs24  43 [1989]), p. 30.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 137.}{\plain \fs24   Once again Francesca blames another for the two lovers' predicament, this time the \softline
go-between in the tale of Lancelot and Guinevere as well as author of the tale.  By now we have \softline
come to see -- or should have -- how often her problems are laid at the doors of others.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 138.}{\plain \fs24   Francesca, reading a book that leads to her 'conversion' to sin and death in the \softline
company of a man named Paul, is the 'negative antitype' of St. Augustine, reading a book by Paul \softline
that leads to his conversion (}{\plain \fs24 \i Confessions}{\plain \fs24  VIII.xii -- see T.K. Swing for what seems to be the first \softline
observation of this striking connection [}{\plain \fs24 \i The Fragile Leaves of the Sibyl}{\plain \fs24  (Westminster: The \softline
Newman Press, 1962)], p. 299, and further discussion by Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 ], pp. 112-13).  Augustine is converted by reading a passage in St. Paul (Romans \softline
13:13-14): 'Let us walk honestly as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering \softline
and wantonness, not in strife and envying.  But put you on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not \softline
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.'  Here, we may reflect, Francesca reads a book \softline
and is 'converted,' by doing so, to the lust that leads to death.  And if Augustine was converted by \softline
reading a man named Paul, Francesca gives herself to adultery with a man bearing the same \softline
name.  As Swing has pointed out, Francesca's last words, }{\plain \fs24 \i quel giorno pi{\f2 \'6a} non vi leggemmo avante}{\plain \fs24  \softline
(that day we read in it no further), seem more than coincidentally close to Augustine's }{\plain \fs24 \i nec ultra \softline
volui legere}{\plain \fs24  (and I did not wish to read any further).  For support of the idea that Dante is here \softline
thinking of this pivotal moment in Augustine's spiritual autobiography, see John A. Scott, \softline
"Dante's Francesca and the Poet's Attitude toward Courtly Literature," }{\plain \fs24 \i Reading Medieval Studies}{\plain \fs24  \softline
5 (1979), p. 14.  A recent study of the presence of Augustine in Dante does not deal with the \softline
question; see Selene Sarteschi ( "Sant'Agostino in Dante e nell'et{\f2 \'42} di Dante," in her }{\plain \fs24 \i Per la \softline
"Commedia" e non per essa soltanto}{\plain \fs24  [Rome: Bulzoni, 2002 (1999)], pp. 171-94).  If we are meant \softline
to think of Augustine's book here, that would round off this canto's concern with confession (see \softline
discussion, above, in the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.8 and V.118-120).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 140.}{\plain \fs24   We now realize that during the entire episode we have not heard a word from Paolo.  \softline
Dante will return to this strategy when he twice again involves pairs of sinners in suffering \softline
together, Diomedes with Ulysses in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXVI, Ruggieri with Ugolino in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXIII.  In \softline
each case one of the two is a silent partner.  We can try to imagine what an eternity of silence in \softline
the company of the voluble being who shares the culpability for one's damnation might be like.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ), p. 94, defends breaking the \softline
line where he does (after }{\plain \fs24 \i piang{\f1\u235\'eb}a}{\plain \fs24  and not, as in the 1921 edition, after }{\plain \fs24 \i s{\f2 \'58}}{\plain \fs24 ), because that \softline
punctuation would make it seem that Dante wept only for Paolo's plight, and not for the condition 
of both the lovers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 141.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's death-like swoon has him experiencing something akin to the death in \softline
sensuality experienced by Francesca and Paolo.  This is to be at odds with the view of Pietrobono \softline
(comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.142), who argues that Dante's death-like collapse mirrors his attaining of the \softline
state urged by Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, chapter 6, wherein the Christian 'dies' to sin in \softline
imitation of Christ (e.g.,'For he that is dead is freed from sin' -- Romans 6:7).  It would rather \softline
seem that this is exactly }{\plain \fs24 \i not}{\plain \fs24  the state attained by the protagonist at this point in the poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Donald Maddox ("The Arthurian Intertexts of }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  114 [1996]), pp. \softline
119-22, draws a parallel between Dante's fainting spell and that suffered by Galehot in the prose \softline
Lancelot.  For the OF prose version consulted by Dante, see Paget Toynbee, 'Dante and the \softline
Lancelot Romance,' in his }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies and Researches}{\plain \fs24  (Port Washington, NY: Kennikat Press, \softline
1971 [1902]), pp. 1-37.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 142.}{\plain \fs24   Torraca (comm. on }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.142) was perhaps the first commentator to note the \softline
Arthurian material that lies behind Dante's famous line: the Italian prose version of the stories of \softline
Arthur's court, }{\plain \fs24 \i La tavola ritonda}{\plain \fs24 , XLVII, where Tristan's response to Isolde's death is described \softline
as follows: 'e cadde s{\f2 \'58} come corpo morto.'  The protagonist is thus compared to the victim of \softline
overwhelming passion.  His fainting marks him here as unable to control his pity, as it had had \softline
the same effect with respect to fear two cantos earlier (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.136).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The fifth canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  is the cause of continuing debate.  Where are we to locate \softline
ourselves as witnesses to these scenes?  Romantic readers understandably tend to align \softline
themselves with the love that Francesca emblematizes and/or the pity that Dante exhibits; \softline
moralizing ones with the firmness that an Augustinian reader would feel.  Virgil perhaps, given \softline
his silence through most of the second half of the canto (once Francesca appears on the scene he \softline
speaks only two words: 'che pense?' [what are your thoughts? -- }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.111]), would then seem to \softline
be trying to rein in Dante's enthusiastic involvement with this enticing shade.  Yet even as \softline
theologically-oriented a reader as Mazzoni ("Il canto V dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno,}{\plain \fs24 " }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis Romana: \softline
Letture degli anni 1973-76}{\plain \fs24  [Rome: Bonacci, 1977], pp. 125-26) finds it important to distance \softline
himself from such 'rigid moralizing' as is found in Giovanni Busnelli, "La ruina del secondo \softline
cerchio e Francesca da Rimini," }{\plain \fs24 \i Miscellanea Dantesca pubblicata a cura del Comitato cattolico \softline
padovano per il VI centenario della morte del Poeta}{\plain \fs24  [Padua, 1922], pp. 49-60, and in Rocco \softline
Montano, }{\plain \fs24 \i Storia della poesia di Dante}{\plain \fs24 , vol. I (Naples: Quaderni di Delta, 1962).  A view similar \softline
to Mazzoni's is found in a much-cited essay by Renato Poggioli: 'The "romance" of Paolo and \softline
Francesca becomes in Dante's hands an "antiromance," or rather, both things at once.  As such, it \softline
is able to express and to judge romantic love at the same time' ("Tragedy or Romance? A Reading \softline
of the Paolo and Francesca Episode in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i PMLA}{\plain \fs24  72 [1957], p. 358).  In America, \softline
the role of the 'rigid moralizer' has been played, in recent times, most notably by Anthony Cassell \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante's Fearful Art of Justice}{\plain \fs24  [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984]), with similar \softline
responses from most of his reviewers.  For Mazzoni and many, perhaps most, contemporary \softline
readers, the canto needs to be responded to more generously than the 'moralizers' would like.  \softline
And, to be sure, there is at times a certain perhaps unfortunately zealous tone in the words of such \softline
critics.  On the other hand, their views seem only to accord with the overall aims of the poet and \softline
his poem.  Francesca is, after all, in hell.  The love she shares with Paolo was and is a 'mad love' \softline
(for this concept see Silvio Avalle d'Arco, "... de fole amor," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Modelli semiologici nella \softline
"Commedia" di Dante}{\plain \fs24  [Milan: Bompiani, 1975]), pp. 97-121; 137-73.  And so, where some 
would find pity the middle ground for the reader to occupy, between the sinful lust of Francesca \softline
and Paolo and the 'rigid moralizers,' others, including this commentator, argue that it is pity itself \softline
that is here at fault.  }{\plain \fs24 \i Amore}{\plain \fs24  and }{\plain \fs24 \i piet{\f2 \'42}}{\plain \fs24  are no doubt among the 'key words' of the canto (see above, \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.91-93); that does not mean that they must function in opposition to one another.  \softline
They may be versions of the same emotion.  Indeed, if we see that Francesca's aim is precisely to \softline
gain Dante's pity, and that she is successful in doing so, we perhaps ought to question his offering \softline
of it.  Sympathy for the damned, in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 , is nearly always and nearly certainly the sign of a \softline
wavering moral disposition.  To cite again the words of Guido da Pisa (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XX.28-30), \softline
'the time for mercy is here in this world, while in the world to come it is time only for justice.'  \softline
That is a standard Christian medieval view.  Twenty-first-century readers should probably keep it \softline
in mind.  However, for a strong attack on such readings, one which argues for the notion that, in \softline
all his works, Dante accepts the ineluctable force of passionate love, see Ignazio Baldelli, }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e \softline
Francesca}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1999), esp. pp. 66-67, 73-87.  For a more balanced evaluation of \softline
this fundamental problem in the interpretation of Dante's view of carnal affection, see Claudia \softline
Villa ("Tra affetto e piet{\f2 \'42}: per }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24  51 [1999]), pp. 513-41.\par
}}