{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 15}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-3.}{\plain \fs24   Both the words }{\plain \fs24 \i margini}{\plain \fs24  (borders) and }{\plain \fs24 \i ruscello}{\plain \fs24  (stream) appear in the passage at \softline
which the forward motion of the journey was arrested in the previous canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIV.79-84).  \softline
The action, interrupted by Virgil's discourse about Crete and the }{\plain \fs24 \i gran veglio}{\plain \fs24 , now continues.  The \softline
poets walk along one of the two 'banks' that rise above the barren plain of sand and border the red \softline
stream as it heads for the lower regions.  Thus we know that all their movement until they reach \softline
the edge of the next boundary (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVI.103) is on a downward gradient, headed toward the \softline
center of the pit.  This revision in their usual procedure (a leftward, circling movement) is \softline
necessitated by the topography of the ring of violence against God, the sand where flakes of fire \softline
fall and which admits no mortal traversal.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 4-12.}{\plain \fs24   The double simile compares the construction made by God to carry the 'water' of \softline
hell toward its final destination to the huge earthworks engineered in Flanders and in northern \softline
Italy to protect farmland and human habitations from flood.  'Carentana' probably refers (the exact \softline
reference is debated in the commentaries) to the mountains north of Padua from which the spring \softline
snows release their torrents.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 13-21.}{\plain \fs24   Another double comparison.  As the poets move away from the wood of the \softline
suicides and down across the sand along their dyke, they approach a group of the damned.  Its \softline
members examine them as men look at one another under a new moon and as an aging tailor \softline
concentrates upon threading his needle.  The first comparison may suggest the image of \softline
homosexual 'cruising' in the darkest of moonlit nights (it is difficult for modern readers to imagine \softline
how dark the night-time streets of medieval cities were); the second conveys the intensity of such \softline
gazing.  For this way of reading many of the words and images of the canto see Joseph Pequigney \softline
("Sodomy in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  and }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Representations}{\plain \fs24  36 [1991]), pp. 22-42.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab There has been much recent debate about whether or not the sin punished here is in fact \softline
homosexuality.  The principle negative findings are those advanced by Andr{\f1\u233\'e9} P{\f1\u233\'e9}zard (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante sous \softline
la pluie de feu}{\plain \fs24  [Paris: Vrin, 1950]), Richard Kay ( }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante's Swift and Strong: Essays on "Inferno" \softline
XV}{\plain \fs24  [Lawrence: The Regents Press of Kansas, 1978]) and Peter Armour ("Dante's Brunetto: The \softline
Paternal Paterine?" }{\plain \fs24 \i Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24  38 [1983], pp. 1-38;  "The Love of Two Florentines: Brunetto \softline
Latini and Bondie Dietaiuti," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24  9 [1991], pp. 60-71.)   P{\f1\u233\'e9}zard's \softline
solution is that these sinners were guilty of blasphemy in deriding the mother tongue; Kay's, that \softline
they were guilty of denying the political supremacy of the empire; Armour's, that Brunetto was \softline
guilty of a Manichean heresy.  For bibliography of other recent discussions see Deborah Contrada \softline
("Brunetto's Sin: Ten Years of Criticism [1977-1986]," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante: Summa Medievalis}{\plain \fs24 , ed. C. \softline
Franco and L. Morgan [Stony Brook, N.Y.: Forum Italicum, 1995]), pp. 192-207.  One of the \softline
principle issues facing those who oppose these interesting arguments is that in purgatory \softline
homosexuality is regarded a sin of lust and thus of incontinence.  If it is punished here in Violence, \softline
it would be in a different category than it occupies there.  Had Dante thought of homosexuality as \softline
the sin against nature when he composed }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 , with its basic organization taken from Aristotle \softline
and Cicero, and as a sin of lust when he composed the second }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24 ?  If he did so, possibly he \softline
should not have.  Despite the significant contradiction that results, most students of the problem \softline
remain convinced that the sin punished in cantos XV and XVI is in fact homosexuality, and are \softline
supported by the text itself.  The sin punished here is surely what is referred to by the name of the 
city 'Soddoma' (Sodom) at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XI.50; in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  XXVI.40 the penitent homosexuals call \softline
out that word in self-identification and penitence (and report that they do so at }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.79).  \softline
If Dante had wanted us to separate the two sins, he made it awfully difficult for us to follow his \softline
logic in so doing.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For an attempt to rationalize the discrepancy see Pequigney, pp. 31-39.  He argues that \softline
Dante had changed his mind about the moral turpitude of homosexuality between the time he \softline
wrote this canto and the composition of the Terrace of Lust in Purgatory, where the sin of the \softline
penitent (and saved) homosexuals is seen as roughly equal to that of the penitent (and saved) \softline
heterosexual lovers.  Gabriele Muresu ({\u8220\'93}Tra violenza e lussuria: Dante e la 'sodomia,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  \softline
14 [1999], pp. 7-17), drawing on his previous study ({\u8220\'93}Tra gli adepti di Sodoma [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XV]," }{\plain \fs24 \i La \softline
Rassegna della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24  102 [1998], pp. 375-414), counters Pequigney's arguments, \softline
first pointing to the tradition anchored in St. Thomas (}{\plain \fs24 \i ST}{\plain \fs24  I-II, xxxi, 7) that this sin against nature \softline
is indeed a form of violence.  He argues, against Pequigney, that the reformed homosexuals on the \softline
mountain had not hardened their wills as had the homosexuals in hell, i.e., that their sins remained \softline
those of appetite, a sinful disposition or natural inclination, but not of calculated choice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 23-24.}{\plain \fs24   The sinner, standing below Dante, must reach up to touch the hem of his garment.  \softline
His words of recognition capture the tone of an elderly teacher recognizing his former star pupil \softline
and, some would argue, of his effeminacy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28-30.}{\plain \fs24   Dante recognizes his old 'teacher,' Brunetto Latini (ca. 1220-94).  He probably \softline
taught Dante by the example of his works rather than in any classroom, but the entire scene is \softline
staged as a reunion between teacher and former student.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Brunetto, whose life has a number of similarities to Dante's, was a Florentine Guelph, a \softline
man of letters who was much involved in politics, and, not least in importance, he wrote narrative \softline
verse in the vernacular; he was also a notary, which accounts for his title, }{\plain \fs24 \i ser}{\plain \fs24 .  He became a }{\plain \fs24 \i de \softline
facto}{\plain \fs24  exile when he learned about the battle of Montaperti (1260) and the triumph of the \softline
Ghibellines while he was in France.  He stayed there for six years and, in exile, wrote both his \softline
French encyclopedic treatise, the }{\plain \fs24 \i Livre dou Tresor}{\plain \fs24 , or 'Treasure,' and his narrative poem in \softline
rhymed couplets, referred to as the }{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24  ('Little Treasure'), at that point, even though \softline
incomplete, the longest narrative poem composed in Italian.   Returning to Florence after the \softline
'restoration' of 1266 in the wake of the battle of Benevento, he took up his political and notarial \softline
chores, and died in the city, much honored, in 1294.  (For a careful presentation of the importance \softline
of Brunetto for Dante, see Francesco Mazzoni, 'Latini, Brunetto' (ED.1971.3), pp. 579-88.  See \softline
also Mazzoni's essential study of Dante's borrowings from Brunetto ("Brunetto in Dante," intr. to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Il Tesoretto. Il Favolello}{\plain \fs24  [Alpignano: A. Tallone, 1967], pp. ix-xl) and Charles Davis's article \softline
("Brunetto Latini and Dante," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi medievali}{\plain \fs24  8 [1967], pp. 421-50).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The poet's honorific feelings toward Brunetto are perhaps mirrored in the word his name \softline
rhymes with: 'intelletto.'  And his answering gesture, to move his face down toward his 'teacher,' \softline
certainly does so as well.  (The Petrocchi text here offers what is surely an implausible reading: 'la \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i mano}{\plain \fs24  alla sua faccia' (which we have translated as it stands).  It seems nearly certain that the text \softline
should read, as it does in many manuscripts, 'la }{\plain \fs24 \i mia}{\plain \fs24  alla sua faccia,' i.e., Dante bent his face \softline
toward Brunetto's in an act of homage.  This better reading is confirmed by the later verse (v. 44) \softline
that has Dante walking with his head still bent down in reverence (see note to v. 50).  For further \softline
discussion, see Hollander, "}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XV.29: 'chinando la mia alla sua faccia,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i Electronic Bulletin 
of the Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24  (August 2001).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab There is dispute over whether the word 'qui' refers to Brunetto's placement here among \softline
the homosexuals or in hell itself.  It seems more likely that the second reference is intended.  See \softline
Lino Pertile ("}{\plain \fs24 \i Qui}{\plain \fs24  in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 : deittici e cultura popolare," }{\plain \fs24 \i Italian Quarterly}{\plain \fs24  37 [2000]), pp. 57-61, arguing that the adverb refers to Brunetto's presence, standing before Dante in this very place \softline
in the darkness of hell.  Perhaps more convincingly Muresu (Tra violenza e lussuria: Dante e la \softline
'sodomia,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  14 [1999]), p. 9, argues that it simply refers to hell in general.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 31-42.}{\plain \fs24   Brunetto, disdainful of his fellows and glad to be able to share the company of his \softline
pupil, cannot sit down to talk in dignity and calm, but must keep moving, since that is the \softline
condition of his punishment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 48.}{\plain \fs24   A number of commentaries on this passage cite }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  VI.531-534, Deiphobus's \softline
similar questions to Aeneas.  It is striking that Brunetto never discovers the identity of Dante's \softline
leader (nor did Cavalcante in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X).  Like Cavalcante's son Guido's, Brunetto's body of work is \softline
notably unmarked by Virgil's influence.  The omission, in other words, may be entirely intentional.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 50.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's reflection upon his own lostness at the outset (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.3; I.14) picks up, as a \softline
few commentators have sensed (Pietrobono perhaps the first) a similar passage in Brunetto's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24 , vv. 186-90:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab \tab e io, in tal corrotto\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-2160\li2160\tx720\tx1440\tx2160 
{\plain \fs24           \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab pensando a capo chino,\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-2160\li2160\tx720\tx1440\tx2160 
{\plain \fs24           \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab perdei il gran cammino,\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab           \ul0 \tab e tenni a la traversa\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab           \ul0 \tab d'una selva diversa.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab (And I, in such great vexation, my head bowed down, lost the main road and came upon a \softline
path that crossed a strange wood.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 The phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i a capo chino}{\plain \fs24  (my head bowed down) has perhaps already been used to describe \softline
Dante's reverence before Brunetto (v. 44 -- see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XV.28-30), at once both a fitting \softline
tribute to the author of the poem which served as the closest vernacular precedent for Dante's \softline
own vernacular narrative poem and a reminder that Brunetto's 'lostness' would become \softline
permanent, while Dante's is only temporary.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 54.}{\plain \fs24   Dante had criticized Brunetto's (along with other Tuscan poets') Italian poetry for its \softline
low dialectism in }{\plain \fs24 \i De vulgari Eloquentia}{\plain \fs24  (I.xiii.1); now he himself uses a Tuscan dialectical form \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i ca}{\plain \fs24 , for }{\plain \fs24 \i casa}{\plain \fs24 , 'house' or 'home') as though in apology; and he uses it to express the high and \softline
ultimate purpose of his journey, his return to the God who made him.  It is a moment of stunning \softline
force.  The expression was more prominently found in northern dialects, according to Parodi \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Lingua e letteratura}{\plain \fs24 , ed. G. Folena [Venice: Neri Pozza, 1957], vol. II, p. 274), but also in \softline
Tuscany even before the time of Dante.  Some commentators take the meaning to be 'back to \softline
Florence,' and some read it metaphorically, i.e., back on the right moral path.  But almost all of \softline
the earliest glossators and most of the moderns as well observe that the phrase refers to the goal 
of the voyage, God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 55.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's 'star' is probably his natal sign, Gemini.  Brunetto here and elsewhere sees \softline
Dante's special status as related to the influence of the heavens rather than to the election of \softline
Heaven.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-60.}{\plain \fs24   Brunetto's desire to aid Dante in his current and future plight, given the context of \softline
the discussion that follows, would seem rather to refer to his political life than to his literary one, \softline
though it is difficult to separate the two.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 61-78.}{\plain \fs24   Brunetto, like Farinata (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X.79-81), prophesies Dante's exile.  His sense of the \softline
history of Florence (perhaps reflecting his own treatment of this subject in the first book of his \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Tresor}{\plain \fs24 ) puts forward the legend that Florence was populated by the Romans after they destroyed \softline
neighboring Fiesole in order to put an end to Catiline's conspiracy.  Unfortunately, their \softline
descendants, the Florentine nobility, allowed the surviving Fiesolans to emigrate and mix their \softline
base population with the Roman stock.  For Dante, all the city's (and his own) troubles stem from \softline
this original mistake.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 83-85.}{\plain \fs24   Dante pays his debt to Brunetto.  But what was it that Brunetto (or, more likely, \softline
his writings) taught Dante about immortality?  Brunetto himself (}{\plain \fs24 \i Tresor}{\plain \fs24  II.cxx.1) says that fame \softline
for good works gives one a second life on earth.  Surely that is not enough for the Christian \softline
Dante, who knows the true meaning of immortality.  The only }{\plain \fs24 \i seconde vie}{\plain \fs24  that matters is in the \softline
afterlife.  Is Dante saying that Brunetto taught him this?  That seems impossible.  But he did learn \softline
from him how his earthly fame might be established by writing a narrative poem in Italian.  And \softline
his heavenly reward might be combined with that one if his poem were, unlike Brunetto's work, \softline
dedicated to a higher purpose.  Perhaps one of the earliest commentators said this best: Brunetto \softline
gave Dante 'the knowledge that does not allow him to die either in his essential being in the other \softline
world, nor with respect to fame in this one' (Jacopo della Lana [comm. to vv. 82-85]).  For the \softline
work of Brunetto that had such effect on Dante see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XV.119.  For advocacy of the \softline
traditional Christian meaning of 'immortality' here see Muresu ({\u8220\'93}Tra gli adepti di Sodoma [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XV]," }{\plain \fs24 \i La Rassegna della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24  102 [1998], pp. 390-400.  And for the view that 'ad \softline
ora ad ora,' traditionally understood to mean, as it is translated here, 'from time to time,' really \softline
means 'continually,' see Giovannella Desideri, }{\plain \fs26 \fs26 "Per amor di cosa che non duri (}{\plain \fs26 \i\fs26 Inferno}{\plain \fs26 \fs26  XIII e \softline
XV, vv. 80-84)," }{\plain \fs26 \i\fs26 Critica del testo}{\plain \fs26 \fs26  2 (1999), pp. }{\plain \fs24 764-70.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 88-90.}{\plain \fs24   The protagonist, responding to Brunetto's warning that his good deeds will not go \softline
unpunished (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XV.61-64), adverts to Farinata's similar prophecy and Virgil's promise of \softline
Beatrice's eventual explanation of it.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  X.130-132.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 91-94.}{\plain \fs24   Dante claims that he is ready for Fortune's adversity.  See the similar but stronger \softline
utterance at }{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24  XVII.22-24.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 95-96.}{\plain \fs24   For a reading of the 'peasant' that is based in the representation of Saturn as an old \softline
and tired farmer, carrying a spade or mattock, and thus keyed to the allegorical understanding of \softline
Saturn as time, see Amilcare Iannucci ("}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XV.95-96: Fortune's Wheel and the Villainy of 
Time," }{\plain \fs24 \i Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24  3 [1982], pp. 1-11).  The phrase would then mean: 'let Fortune \softline
turn her wheel as she pleases and let time continue its relentless course' (p. 6).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 99.}{\plain \fs24   This is Virgil's only utterance in the canto.  (Walking ahead of Dante, accompanied by \softline
Brunetto, who is moving close to the bank, along the sand, Virgil is not 'in the frame' for most of \softline
the scene.)  How we should read the remark is no longer as clear as it once seemed.  Is it \softline
congratulatory or monitory?  All the early commentators who deal with it think it is the latter, i.e., \softline
Dante has just said a true thing (vv. 91-96), but something difficult to live up to.  And that seems \softline
the most likely reading.  However, beginning with Daniello (comm. to this verse), some \softline
commentators think it refers to Dante's having remembered Virgil's words with a similar import \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . V.710): 'superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est' (all fortune is to be overcome by bearing it).  \softline
Others believe it refers to Dante's having remembered Virgil's utterance at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  X.127-132.  \softline
Both these readings make Virgil's words congratulatory.  Berthier (comm. to this verse) offered a \softline
cogent proposal for a return to the reading of the early commentators.  In our own day, however, \softline
the commentary tradition is various and confused.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 106-114.}{\plain \fs24   Brunetto indicates that all his companions were men of letters, identifying \softline
Priscian (the great Latin grammarian of the early sixth century); Francesco d'Accorso (1225-93), a \softline
renowned jurist of Bologna; and Andrea de' Mozzi (died 1296).  A Florentine, he was made \softline
bishop of Florence (on the Arno) in 1287 until he was transferred to Vicenza (on the \softline
Bacchiglione) by Pope Boniface VIII (here ironically referred to with the papal formula 'servant of \softline
servants') in 1295 for his riotous habits.  According to Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to vv. 110-114), Andrea was fond of saying 'The grace of God is like the turds of goats, which, falling from \softline
on high, drop hither and yon dispersedly.'  None of these (neither is Brunetto) is recorded by other \softline
writers as having been homosexual.  The last verse, indicating Andrea's 'sin-stretched sinews' \softline
would, however, seem to indicate his sexual activity (and the meaning of this line is thus hotly \softline
contested by those who deny that homosexuality is punished in this ring).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 118.}{\plain \fs24   What is the division that separates these two groups of homosexuals?  We should \softline
note that Brunetto, accompanying Dante, has gone lower down the sloping sand than he generally \softline
does; his group apparently remains higher up.  The only clue given us by the text is that his \softline
fellows are all men of letters, while the next one will be made up of politicians (but then Brunetto \softline
must be considered, at least to some degree, a 'politician' himself).  Is that what keeps them \softline
separate?  It does not seem likely.  It would rather seem that the two groups are kept separate by \softline
their particular form of sexual deviance, as Boccaccio (comm. to vv. 115-118) appears to suggest.  \softline
For instance, and as Professor John Gledson suggested when he was a graduate student at \softline
Princeton, the first group may all have been pederasts, men who preferred young boys for their \softline
sexual encounters; the second may have been sodomites, those who enjoyed such contact with \softline
those of their own age.  It seems, however, impossible to come to any decision with certainty.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 119.}{\plain \fs24   It has long been assumed that Brunetto asks Dante's affectionate remembrance of his \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Tresor}{\plain \fs24 .  In the opinion of some, however, it is far better to understand that the work in question is \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24 .  This is not to deny the importance of the French encyclopedic treatise for Dante, \softline
who knew it well and whose memory is suffused by it.  However, given his predilection for \softline
poetry, it seems likely that for him the pivotal work was the }{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24  because it was the primary 
Italian model for the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24 .  It is fairly clear why nearly all the commentators think that Dante \softline
is referring to the }{\plain \fs24 \i Tresor}{\plain \fs24 : it is a major work, at least by comparison to the unfinished }{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24 , \softline
and people do not especially appeciate the poetry of Brunetto (perhaps with good reason).  But \softline
why would Dante not be giving credit to the work which made a difference to }{\plain \fs24 \i him}{\plain \fs24  as poet?  That \softline
seems a sensible view of the matter.  However, it was only in the eighteenth century that a \softline
commentator (Lombardi, comm. to this verse) would suggest this possibility, and only in the \softline
nineteenth that one would seize upon it (Gregorio Di Siena, comm. to this verse).  An as yet \softline
unpublished book on Dante and Brunetto by Frank Ordiway extends the evidence offered by \softline
Mazzoni ("Brunetto in Dante," intr. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Il Tesoretto. Il Favolello}{\plain \fs24  [Alpignano: A. Tallone, 1967], \softline
pp. ix-xl) of Dante's considerable citation of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24  into a strong argument for a reference \softline
to the Italian work in this line.  For bibliography of those who have argued for a reference to the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24  see Hollander, "Dante and Cino da Pistoia," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  110 (1992), 82n.  More \softline
recently, Massimo Verdicchio ("Re-Reading Brunetto Latini and }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XV," }{\plain \fs24 \i Quaderni \softline
d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24  21 [2000]), pp. 67-70, also casts a vote for the }{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The text of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24  itself offers evidence that it is the work we should think of here:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab \tab Io, Burnetto Latino,\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab \tab che vostro in ogni guisa\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab \tab mi son sanza divisa,\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab \tab a voi mi }{\plain \fs24 \i racomando}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab \tab Poi vi presento e mando \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab \tab questo ricco }{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoro}{\plain \fs24 ,\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab \tab che vale argento ed oro:...\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab (vv. 70-76; italics added)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab (I, Brunetto Latini, who am yours in every way, without any reservation commend myself \softline
to you.  Then I present and send to you this rich Treasure, which is worth silver and gold.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Within the text of what }{\plain \fs24 \i we}{\plain \fs24  call the }{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoretto}{\plain \fs24  we find that its own title for itself is }{\plain \fs24 \i Tesoro}{\plain \fs24  (and this \softline
will occur twice more in the work).  And we can hear, in this verse, another echo of the Italian \softline
work, the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i raccomandare}{\plain \fs24 .  It seems awfully difficult to go on believing that the }{\plain \fs24 \i Tresor}{\plain \fs24  is on \softline
our poet's mind at this crucial juncture of his presentation of his literary 'father,' his final words in \softline
Dante's poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 121-124.}{\plain \fs24   The canto concludes with a simile that perfectly expresses Dante's ambivalent \softline
feelings about Brunetto.  He looks every bit the winner -- but he is in last place.  In the actual race \softline
run outside Verona, the runners ran naked, according to the early commentators; the winner \softline
received a piece of green cloth, while the one who finished last was given a rooster, which he had \softline
to carry back into the city with him as a sign of his disgrace and a cause of derisive taunts on the \softline
part of his townsmen.  The case can be made that Dante treats Brunetto in exactly both these \softline
ways.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Two biblical texts are of interest here: 'The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the \softline
strong' (Ecclesiastes 9:11); 'Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one receives the \softline
prize?' (I Corinthians 9:24).\par
}}