{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 17}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-3.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's description of Geryon (not identified by name until }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVII.97) reflects his \softline
triple nature in classical literature.  In the tradition known to Dante, he enticed strangers to be his \softline
guests, only to kill and eat them.  He was eventually killed by Hercules.  In the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  he is twice \softline
identified with the number three: he is described as }{\plain \fs24 \i forma tricorporis umbrae}{\plain \fs24  (the form of the \softline
three-bodied shade -- }{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . VI.289 ) and again as }{\plain \fs24 \i tergemini... Geryonae}{\plain \fs24  (triple Geryon -- }{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
VIII.202).  Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i Heroides}{\plain \fs24  IX.92) says that 'in tribus unus erat' (he was one in three).  In classical \softline
literature he is sometimes referred to as the king of three Iberian islands -- which may account for \softline
his tripleness.  For review of the many classical texts that contain reference to Geryon see \softline
Scartazzini, comm. to XVII.1.  And see the studies of Proto ("Gerione," }{\plain \fs24 \i Giornale dantesco}{\plain \fs24  8 \softline
[1900], pp. 65-105.), Pasquini (Il canto di Gerione," }{\plain \fs24 \i Atti e memorie dell'Arcadia}{\plain \fs24  4 [1967], pp. \softline
346-68), and Armour ("I }{\plain \fs24 \i Monstra}{\plain \fs24  e }{\plain \fs24 \i Mirabilia}{\plain \fs24  del mondo ai tempi di Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i I "monstra" \softline
nell'"Inferno" dantesco: tradizione e simbologie}{\plain \fs24  [Spoleto: Centro italiano di studi sull'alto \softline
medioevo, 1997], pp. 151-53.)  'Dante's image was profoundy modified, however, by Pliny's \softline
description -- followed by Solinus -- of a strange beast called Mantichora (}{\plain \fs24 \i Historia Naturalis}{\plain \fs24 , \softline
VIII, 30) which has the face of a man, the body of a lion, and a tail ending in a sting like a \softline
scorpion's' (Grandgent, Note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVII).  All these threes find an answer in the three \softline
destructive action verbs describing him in this first tercet.  This embodiment of fraud (he is the \softline
'foul effigy of fraud' at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVII.7) is thus presented as the counterfeit of Christ, three-in-one \softline
rather than one-in-three.  The very words that introduce this numerically central canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 , \softline
'Ecco la fiera' (Behold the beast), would seem to echo the familar tag for Christ, }{\plain \fs24 \i Ecce homo}{\plain \fs24  \softline
(Behold the man [John 19:5]), as a student at Dartmouth College (Sarah LaBudde '84) suggested \softline
some years ago.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 10-11.}{\plain \fs24   The positive words that accompany this description, invoking justice and \softline
benignity, remind us of the absence of such qualities in hell.  Now they appear, but only as the \softline
masks for Fraud.  The realm of Violence here will show us its last set of sinners, the usurers, men \softline
identified by bestial devices hanging from their throats; this first tip of the iceberg of Fraud is in \softline
the form of a huge beast, his bestial and reptilian parts at first mainly hidden in the void, with the \softline
fair face of a man.  The last book in the Christian scripture tells of similar creatures, the locusts of \softline
destruction that will be loosed upon the world who have faces like the faces of men and tails like \softline
the tails of scorpions, with stingers in them (Apoc. 9:7; 9:10), as was perhaps first noted in \softline
Berthier's commentary (to vv. 10-13).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 14-18.}{\plain \fs24   The 'tattooed' body of Geryon looms in eerie beauty until the resemblance to the \softline
similarly 'painted' leopard of }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  I.42 (referred to again at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVI.108) suggests that we can \softline
understand both these creatures as embodiments of the sins of fraud (see Durling and Martinez on \softline
these verses (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996).  And the concluding \softline
reference to Arachne (Ovid, }{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . VI.5-145), that world-class weaver turned into a spider, \softline
whose metamorphosed beguiling art has a purpose: the entrapment of flies.  Chiavacci Leonardi \softline
(Milan: Mondadori, 1991), }{\plain \fs24 \i ad loc}{\plain \fs24 ., calls attention to Rossetti's remarks (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVII.7-12), in which he interprets the shape of the serpent as a sort of history of the process of fraud: \softline
'Fraud begins its work by inspiring trust (the face of a just man); then weaves its deceit (the \softline
serpentine trunk); and at last strikes its final blow (the pointed tail).'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab As for the word }{\plain \fs24 \i sommesse}{\plain \fs24  at verse 17 (here translated 'warp and woof'), Toynbee, \softline
offering a different understanding in his note 'Dante's References to Tartar Cloths', }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies \softline
and Researches}{\plain \fs24  (Port Washington, NY: Kennikat Press, 1971 [1902], pp. 115-20), suggests that \softline
it describes 'not woven designs, but embroidered or appliqu{\f1\u233\'e9} patterns' (p. 117).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-24.}{\plain \fs24   The two similes identify the posture of Geryon in terms of homely images, a boat \softline
drawn up to shore, a beaver fishing with its tail.  (Beavers were reputed to use their tails as bait, \softline
eventually grasping the fish thereby attracted with their paws.)  Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 19-21) \softline
pointed out that hyperactive Teutonic appetite was a matter of note as far back as in the histories \softline
of Tacitus.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28-33.}{\plain \fs24   Their descent to the right causes some commentators to think that the travelers \softline
have changed direction, as they did in the Circle of heresy; what they have done is merely what \softline
they have done before, all across the ring of the violent against nature; that is, they are moving \softline
downward toward the center.  They have not changed their essential leftward course on this \softline
occasion, either.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 37-39.}{\plain \fs24   For only the second time in the poem Virgil leaves Dante alone (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VIII.106-111).  And now, for the first time, he is allowed to visit a group of sinners unguided.  Virgil's \softline
decision to let him do so probably tells us that he believes the protagonist already proof against \softline
the danger or attraction of usury.  Further, on both occasions we have come to the end of a large \softline
area of hell, first Incontinence and now Violence.  For the idea that the infernal voyage is divided \softline
into five segments, in each of which the protagonist moves through cycles of unworthy fear and \softline
improper sympathy until he reaches firmness against an entire category of sin, see Hollander, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Alleogry in Dante{\u8219\'27}s "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), pp. 301-7, with \softline
addendum in Hollander, "The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24  \softline
(Ravenna: Longo, 1980), pp. 168-69.  For an unusual approach to the problem of the ordering of \softline
the sins of hell, see Ferrante, "}{\plain \fs24 \i Malebolge}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVIII-XXX) as the Key to the Structure of \softline
Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Romance Philology}{\plain \fs24  20 (1967), pp. 456-66).  She also happens to argue for a \softline
five-part division of hell, but on different grounds and with mainly differing result.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 45-48.}{\plain \fs24   Having learned that the homosexuals were punished by continual movement, \softline
reflective of their agitated lives, the reader now finds the third set of the violent against God \softline
sitting in place (and thereby undergoing precisely the punishment that the violent against nature \softline
dreaded).  Usurers, we may understand, have caused money to race from hand to hand, but were \softline
themselves stationary, unmoved movers hunched over their desks in the pursuit of gain.  We are \softline
in the third and final zone of the third ring of the seventh Circle.  Like the first, it is located at a \softline
margin of that Circle (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIV.12).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 55-57.}{\plain \fs24   The usurers, rendered unrecognizable by the burning (and by the degrading nature \softline
of their sin, which is a sin against God's 'grandchild,' industry, yet is also a sin against His child, \softline
nature, because it makes money 'copulate') have their only identity in the coats-of-arms that they \softline
have hanging from their necks, fastened loose enough so that they themselves can see them.  Their \softline
identities are made known to an observer by these devices, but they would rather seem to be \softline
gazing on their 'real' selves, the money that used to fill their purses, than on their escutcheons.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 59-60.}{\plain \fs24   This device indicates the Gianfigliazzi family of Florence, Black Guelphs.  Exactly \softline
which member of the family is not known, but perhaps Dante was happy to leave the door open to \softline
the widest possible speculation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 62-63.}{\plain \fs24   The arms of the Obriachi family, Florentine Ghibellines.  Once again commentators \softline
have proposed various individuals, but without a victorious candidate emerging.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 64-66.}{\plain \fs24   The 'star' among the usurers, the only one with a speaking part, is, most \softline
commentators believe, Reginaldo degli Scrovegni, the only non-Florentine in the little group of \softline
identified sinners.  He was from Padua and was a usurer on a major scale.  A penitential desire to \softline
make up for paternal usurious practice reputedly moved his son, Arrigo, to endow the \softline
construction of the Scrovegni Chapel, its walls devoted to Giotto's frescoes, one of the most \softline
beautiful interior spaces in the Western world.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 67-69.}{\plain \fs24   Reginaldo's discourtesy to Dante is matched by his envious report that his fellow \softline
Paduan (and fellow usurer, still alive as late as 1307), Vitaliano del Dente (there is some \softline
disagreement as to his exact identity among the commentators) will join him here one of these \softline
days.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 72-73.}{\plain \fs24   Mocking his Florentine companions in usury, Reginaldo reports that they, too, are \softline
awaiting a townsman, the 'king of the usurers' of Dante's day (and alive until 1310), Giovanni \softline
Buiamonte, a Ghibelline.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 74-78.}{\plain \fs24   Reginaldo's animalistic, sub-verbal facial gesture in response to the reported \softline
conversations of his companions conveys some of the self-enclosed anti-social nature of these \softline
sinners.  They really did not care for anything but money.  Dante, having been warned by Virgil to \softline
return quickly (and the whole scene has a rushed urgency about it), heads back toward Virgil -- \softline
and Geryon.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab This little narrative (vv. 43-78) of Dante's first (and last) 'solo' adventure in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  is \softline
carried out with a striking mixture of brief understatement and the only vivid colors we find in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24 , as Chiavacci Leonardi (Milan: Mondadori, 1991) points out in her commentary to v. 63).  \softline
The quick spareness of the narration allows the poet to give us five personages in this brief space.  \softline
And for all the brightness of the color on the devices that we see, the net effect is of an enervated \softline
attachment, not so much as to wealth as to the lonely pursuit of infinite gathering.  They are \softline
thirteenth-century precursors of George Eliot's Silas Marner.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 82.}{\plain \fs24   The 'stairs' to which Virgil refers are monstrous creatures, as he looks ahead to their \softline
means of conveyance over the great gaps in walkable terrain that they will face at Cocytus (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXXI.142-143, Antaeus will be their 'stairs' then) and at the center of the Earth (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIV.73-75, where Satan's legs will be the ladder Virgil climbs to begin to draw Dante up from hell).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 97-99.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's commands to Geryon, coupled with the monster's instantaneous \softline
disappearance once his tour of duty is ended, make the reader realize that Virgil has used \softline
extraordinarily persuasive arguments to tame this beast.  His having sent Dante away also reminds \softline
us of the time he left his charge alone but in sight of his temporary yet crushing defeat at the 
hands of the demons at the walls of Dis.  This time he first gets his pupil out of viewing range and \softline
then, we do not know how, manages to control a most difficult demon and turn him into the first \par
}{\plain \fs24 helicopter.  If Dante is the main learner in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 , Virgil learns a few things himself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 106-108.}{\plain \fs24   The extraordinary journey put fear into our hero, which he now may compare to \softline
that felt by classical precursors who failed on similar flights.  As Brownlee points out, Phaeton \softline
(his story is found in Ovid, }{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . II.47-324) dropped the reins of his heavenly chariot as a result \softline
of his terror upon looking at the constellation Scorpio, while Dante mounts on the scorpion-tailed \softline
Geryon in order to accomplish his flight.  See Kevin Brownlee, "Phaeton's Fall and Dante's \softline
Ascent," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  102 (1984), p. 136.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The 'scorching' of the sky, the path of Phaeton's fall, is the Milky Way.  For Dante's \softline
dissimilarity to Phaeton see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXVI.19-24.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 109-111.}{\plain \fs24   Icarus (Ovid, }{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . VIII.183-235), on a second extraordinary flight that \softline
failed, did not obey the instructions of his father, Daedalus, trying instead to turn a voyage home \softline
into a trip through the galaxy.  If the protagonist then thought of these two precursors, he must \softline
have thought that he, too, might die for his temerity; the poet, however, making the analogies \softline
now, sees the comic resolution of a voyage that might have turned tragic except for the fact that \softline
this voyager had God on his side.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 115-126.}{\plain \fs24   This, perhaps the single most melodramatic and implausible narrative passage in \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24 , is accomplished with considerable art.  Dante, his face at first pushed up against the \softline
body of the beast, sees nothing.  He feels the wind on his face, hears the torrent below, finally gets \softline
his eyes into play and sees the flames of lower hell, hears the cries of the damned, and finally, now \softline
that he is able to look, realizes the pattern of his descending flight from the 'approach' of the \softline
circling and rising hellscape.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 127-136.}{\plain \fs24   The simile introduces falconry to the poem; references to this sport of hunting \softline
with birds will reappear several times (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXI.130-132, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XIV.148-151, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XIX.61-66, }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XVIII.45, }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.34-36).  The similetic falcon, like Geryon an unwilling \softline
worker, has come down before finishing his mission (to catch a bird or be summoned home by the \softline
falconer's lure); to compound his bad birdmanship, he does not even land on his master's arm, but \softline
far afield.  Geryon, on the other hand, while equally rebellious, does complete his flight as his \softline
master (Virgil) had ordered.  The simile, now that the fearsome flight is over, has a way of making \softline
Geryon less terrifying than he was, comparing him to a small bird of prey.  At this midpoint of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24  we have a provisional comic ending, with Dante safe and sound exactly halfway there.  \softline
(For Dante's distinctions between tragedy and comedy see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XX.112-114.)  The last \softline
two verses of the canto, however, give Geryon a last moment of terrifying will and power.\par
}}