{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 18}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-18.}{\plain \fs24   The extended introductory passage interrupts the narrative in order to set the new \softline
scene: Malebolge, the eighth Circle, with its ten varieties of fraudulent behaviors.  Only in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  \softline
does an equal number of cantos (17 and 17) create a precise center for a }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24  in the space \softline
between two cantos, and we have just passed it.  The last canto ended with a sort of 'comic' \softline
conclusion to Dante's dangerous voyage on Geryon.  He has now traversed precisely half of the \softline
literary space devoted to the underworld.  Thus, fully half of the }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24 , cantos XVIII to \softline
XXXIV, is dedicated to the sins of Fraud.  That division tells us something about the poet's view \softline
of human behavior, namely that it is better typified by the worst of sins than by the lesser ones.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Robert Durling has developed the schematic idea that all of hell is depicted as having a \softline
structure parallel to that of the human body, with Malebolge representing the belly.  See his \softline
"Deceit and Digestion in the Belly of Hell," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Allegory and Representation: Selected Papers \softline
from the English Institute, 1979-80}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Stephen A. Greenblatt (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins \softline
University Press, 1981), pp. 61-93; and see the commentary of Durling and Martinez (New York \softline
and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), pp. 552-55; 576-77.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The poetry of Malebolge, studied by Edoardo Sanguineti }{\plain \fs24 \i (Interpretazione di Malebolge}{\plain \fs24  \softline
[Florence: Olschki, 1962]), is strikingly self-confident.  One has the feeling that Dante, having \softline
finished his apprenticeship, now has achieved a level of aesthetic performance that may have \softline
surprised even him.  In the seventh canto he had conjoined two kinds of sinners, the avaricious \softline
and the prodigal; but these are two sides of the same sin.  Here for the first time, as something of \softline
a }{\plain \fs24 \i tour de force}{\plain \fs24 , he includes two entirely separate categories of sin in a single canto, one of them \softline
itself subdivided into two groups, as in Canto VII -- all of this in 115 lines.  The precision of the \softline
operation is noteworthy, and may be represented as follows:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i (1) panders & seducers\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab (2) flatterers}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24\fi-4320\li4320\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320 
{\plain \fs24 \tab disposition of both (22-39)\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab disposition (100-114)\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-4320\li4320\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320 
{\plain \fs24 \tab modern exemplar (52-66)\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab modern exemplar (115-126)\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-4320\li4320\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320 
{\plain \fs24 \tab classical exemplar (82-99)\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab classical exemplar (127-136)\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For the self-conscious, deliberately Virgilian opening of the canto ('Locus est' is found \softline
several times in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  marking the transition from one poetic place to another), see Marino \softline
Barchiesi's long article, "Arte del prologo e arte della transizione," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  44 (1967), pp. \softline
115-207, a meditation on Dante's narrative technique, including a substantial discussion of this \softline
passage.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The hellscape offers a grey stone circular wall surrounding a stone 'field,' which in turn \softline
surrounds a pit (the 'keep' of this 'castle'); the field is divided into ten valleys, which resemble \softline
moats set around a castle.  The analogy is complete, but works in reverse, since a castle rises \softline
above its surroundings, while this 'castle' is a hole leading into hell.  Our first view of Malebolge \softline
(the name is a Dantean coinage made up of words meaning 'evil' and 'pouches') makes it seem like \softline
a vast, emptied stadium, e.g., the Colosseum, which Dante might have seen in 1301 if he indeed \softline
visited Rome then, or the arena of Verona, which he probably saw at least by 1304.  The former \softline
hypothesis is attractive in that the second image of the canto is also modelled on Roman \softline
architecture: the bridge over the Tiber between Trastevere and the city.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-21.}{\plain \fs24   The narrative is now joined to the action concluding the last canto and the poets \softline
resume their leftward circling movement.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 22-27.}{\plain \fs24   The panders, moving from left to right as Dante views them, are moving in a \softline
direction contrary to his; the seducers, moving from his right to his left, and thus moving in \softline
parallel with him, are going faster than he; but then he has no demons lashing him with whips.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28-33.}{\plain \fs24   The simile, reflecting the Roman invention of two-way traffic in 1300 for the \softline
crowds thronging to the holy places, on the bridge across the Tiber, from the city (to St. Peter's, \softline
after they pass Castel Sant'Angelo) and back again (to the area of Monte Giordano, just off the \softline
Tiber), has caused some to argue that Dante had been in Rome during the Jubilee.  It is more \softline
likely that he was in fact there in 1301 and heard tell of this modern wonder of crowd control.  \softline
That the first city that Malebolge calls to mind is Rome in the Jubilee Year is not without its ironic \softline
thrust, especially since it had been Pope Boniface VIII, so hated by Dante, who proclaimed this \softline
great event (the first in the Church's history).  For a recent bibliography, 172 items regarding this \softline
first Jubilee Year see Enzo Esposito, "Bibliografia 'essenziale' del Giubileo (1300) di Dante e di \softline
Bonifacio VIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  16 (2000), pp. 139-51.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 35.}{\plain \fs24   Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to XVIII.34-36) suggests that the panders are punished \softline
by horned devils because their actions resulted in the cuckoldry of others.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 50.}{\plain \fs24   Venedico was an important political figure of Bologna in the second half of the \softline
thirteenth century.  His sin was in selling his own sister to Opizzo of Este (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XII.111).  He \softline
actually died in 1302, although Dante obviously believed he had died before 1300.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-61.}{\plain \fs24   Venedico's pleasantry insists that there are more Bolognesi in this zone of hell than \softline
currently populate the city itself.  'Sipa' is ancient dialectical Bolognese for 'yes,' and thus the \softline
phrase means 'have grown up speaking Bolognese dialect' between the rivers that mark the eastern \softline
and western confines of the city.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 66.}{\plain \fs24   The demon's rough remark is variously understood: either 'there are no women here \softline
to defraud' (as Venedico did his sister), or 'there are no women here for sale' (to offer to Dante).  \softline
And there may also be a hint of the slang for female genitalia.  In our translation we have tried to \softline
keep both of the first meanings possible.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 72.}{\plain \fs24   The circlings of the whipped sinners, not of the ditches themselves, are almost \softline
certainly what is referred to, just as Francesco da Buti said centuries ago (comm. to XVIII.67-72).  However, it was only some 80 years ago that Enrico Bianchi ("Le 'cerchie eterne,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  3 [1921], pp. 137-39) brought such a comprehension back to the verse, thereby \softline
increasing its power: the reference is to the Florentine custom of whipping a condemned man \softline
along the route to his execution.  Most contemporary commentators accept this reading.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 73-78.}{\plain \fs24   At the high point of the bridge over the ditch on their way toward the next }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24  \softline
the travelers stop to observe the second set of sinners in this one, whom they have not been able \softline
to examine because these were going along in the same direction as were they, and at a faster clip.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 83-85.}{\plain \fs24   Like Capaneus (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIV.46-48), the heroic Jason is allowed to keep some of his \softline
dignity and his stoical strength.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 86-96.}{\plain \fs24   Jason, who will be remembered in }{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24  in a far more positive light, as the \softline
precursor of Dante in his having taken a great voyage and returned with the golden fleece (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
II.16-18; }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XXV.7; }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIII.94-96), is here presented as the classical exemplar of the vile \softline
seducer.  Dante has Virgil condense the lengthy narrative of Jason's exploits found in Ovid \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . VII.1-424) into two details, the seductions of Hypsipyle (daughter of the king of \softline
Lemnos) and of Medea (daughter of the king of Colchis).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For the resonance at v. 91 of Beatrice's description of Virgilian utterance as 'parola ornata' \softline
see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . II.67.  As for Jason's }{\plain \fs24 \i segni}{\plain \fs24  (signs of love), Dante may be thinking of his ability \softline
to move Medea by tears as well as words (see Ovid, }{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . VII.169).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 100-114.}{\plain \fs24   The second ditch is filled with supernatural excrement (it only }{\plain \fs24 \i seems}{\plain \fs24  to have \softline
come from the toilets of humans).  What do flatterers do?  It is unnecessary to repeat the slang \softline
phrases that are used in nearly all languages to characterize their utterance.  What they did above, \softline
they do below, wallowing in excrement, their faces ingesting it as animals guzzle food from their \softline
troughs (see v. 104).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 122.}{\plain \fs24   Alessio Interminei is the first Lucchese whom we encounter, but there will be others, \softline
below.  Dante seems systematically to include in hell representatives of all the major Tuscan cities.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 133-135.}{\plain \fs24   Tha{\f2 \'56}s is a courtesan in Terence's comic play }{\plain \fs24 \i Eunuchus}{\plain \fs24 , and had a reputation \softline
even into the middle ages as a flatterer.  Whether Dante is citing Terence directly (most currently \softline
dispute this) or through Cicero (}{\plain \fs24 \i De amicitia}{\plain \fs24  XXVI.98 -- a text that Dante assuredly did know \softline
and which explicitly associates Tha{\f2 \'56}s with flattery, though there and in Terence she is the one \softline
flattered, not the flatterer) is a matter that still excites argument.  For the most recent claims for \softline
Dante's knowledge of Terence see Claudia Villa (}{\plain \fs24 \i La "lectura Terentii"}{\plain \fs24  [Padua: Antenore, 1984]), \softline
esp. pp. 137-89, but see also the countering arguments of Baranski ("Dante e la tradizione comica \softline
latina," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e la "bella scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f2 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 , ed. A. A. Iannucci \softline
[Ravenna: Longo, 1993]), pp. 230-38 (and now Villa's rejoinder ["}{\plain \fs24 \i Comoedia: laus in canticis \softline
dicta?}{\plain \fs24    Schede per Dante: }{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 , XXV.1 e }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 , XVIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i Rivista di Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  1 \softline
(2001)], pp. 325-31.  After Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 , First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i Scripture and Classical \softline
Authors in Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 [1896]), pp. 12, 261-62, many modern \softline
commentators rightly suggest that Dante's account closely reflects Cicero's, but not Terence's, \softline
further maintaining that we have not a single citation of any play by Terence anywhere in Dante's \softline
work.  It is amusing to see that the seeds of the debate had already been planted in Pietro di \softline
Dante's second redaction at mid-fourteenth century (Pietro2, comm. to these verses) when Pietro \softline
cites the pertinent passage in Terence and then goes on to cite Cicero's reproduction of the scene \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i De amicitia}{\plain \fs24 .  After Pietro, whose second and third redactions were not published until late in \softline
the twentieth century, and before Moore, Terence is the main source mentioned by those \softline
commentators who refer to a classical text, and none refers to Cicero.  More recently Barchiesi \softline
("Arte del prologo e arte della transizione," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  44 [1967], p. 203n., argues that \softline
Dante, if he only knew the passage indirectly from Cicero, knew of its Terentian source from John \softline
of Salisbury's }{\plain \fs24 \i Policraticus}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 136.}{\plain \fs24   Satiety comes quickly when one watches people breathing excrement.\par
}}