{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 16}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-3.}{\plain \fs24   The opening allusion to the noise of falling water is repeated, once the encounter \softline
with the three Florentines is complete, at vv. 92-93.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 15-18.}{\plain \fs24   Everything that we learn about these sinners seconds Virgil's positive opinion of \softline
them.  And in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  VI.79-82 we read that Dante was paricularly interested in meeting Iacopo \softline
and Tegghiaio (along with Farinata, Mosca, and the mysterious Arrigo), Florentines who had \softline
labored to do good for the city.  Again we face a situation in which the sinner seems, apart from \softline
his sin, a thoroughly admirable person, and indeed capable of performing good deeds.  See also \softline
Ciacco in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  VI.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Dante's sympathy here urged Boccaccio (comm. to these verses) to the following \softline
observation: 'In the preceding scenes the author has always been accustomed to show himself \softline
greatly moved when he observes the punishment for a sin by which he felt himself stained.  I do \softline
not know that he here intends that we understand, by the compassion he feels for these sinners, \softline
that he is confessing that he sinned in this shameful way; therefore, I leave that consideration to \softline
others.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-27.}{\plain \fs24   The three sinners who have recognized Dante as Florentine from his clothing \softline
continue their lamentation, but now form themelves into a wheeling circle so that they may remain \softline
in motion (in accord with their penalty) while also staying in one place, like joggers at a stoplight.  \softline
Thus while their feet move in one direction, their heads move in an opposite one, so that their \softline
glances may stay fixed on Dante.  In her article "I Tre Fiorentini: Rodin's Three Shades and Their \softline
Origin in Medieval Illustrations of Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  15 and 16," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  117 (1999), pp. \softline
133-69, Aida Audeh argues that the three shades that surmount Rodin's bronze representation of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i La Porte de l{\u8219\'27}Enfer}{\plain \fs24  (the Gate of Hell) eventually reflect the infernal presence and behavior of \softline
these three sinners and (p. 137) do so in ways that counter the traditional representation of the \softline
three Graces.  While it is not germane to this discussion, it is perhaps also of interest to consider \softline
that (p. 152) Rodin's familiar }{\plain \fs24 \i penseroso}{\plain \fs24  was, in the sculptor's mind, a representation of Dante.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab There is some discussion in the commentaries as to whether Dante refers to classical \softline
wrestling, as presented in Latin epics such as Virgil's and Lucan's, or to a contemporary version of \softline
the sport, or, indeed, to both.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28-42.}{\plain \fs24   The first-named of three Florentines is Guido Guerra (a member of the family of \softline
the Conti Guidi, one of the most powerful in northern Italy); born ca. 1220, grandson of Guido \softline
Guerra IV and Gualdrada de' Ravignani, he was a notably successful Guelph political leader, \softline
leading them back from exile after the battle of Montaperti (1260) to their crushing defeat of the \softline
Ghibellines at Benevento (1266) and their restoration to power in the city; he died in 1272.  The \softline
second is Tegghiaio Aldobrandi, of the noble Adimari family, contemporary and ally of Guido \softline
Guerra in the Guelph cause; along with Guido he counselled the Florentines not to engage in the \softline
expedition against Siena that ended in the disastrous defeat at Montaperti.  The speaker is Iacopo \softline
Rusticucci, also a Guelph, but not, like the two he names, of noble rank (at least according to the \softline
Anonimo Fiorentino's commentary to this passage).  His house and that of his neighbor, \softline
Tegghiaio, were destroyed in the aftermath of Montaperti.  In the eyes of most readers, Iacopo \softline
blames his unwilling wife for his turning to homosexuality.  But now see Chiamenti ("Due 
}{\plain \fs24 \i schedulae}{\plain \fs24  ferine: Dante, }{\plain \fs24 \i Rime}{\plain \fs24  CIII 71 e }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVI 45," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lingua nostra}{\plain \fs24  59 [1998], pp. 7-10), who \softline
argues that the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i fiera}{\plain \fs24  (bestial) used of her rather suggests, on the heels of remarks made \softline
in the third redaction of his commentary by Pietro di Dante, her bestial pleasure in having anal \softline
intercourse with her husband, a form of sexual practice indeed considered sodomitic.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-51.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's journey through hell produces no scene in which he is as cordial to a \softline
group of sinners as this one.  That his affection is directed toward homosexuals is noteworthy, but \softline
does not necessarily involve him in anything more than what a modern reader must consider a \softline
remarkable lack of the typical Christian heterosexual scorn for homosexuals.  The conversation \softline
here, like that with Ciacco, is devoted not to the sin of which these men were guilty, but to their \softline
political concerns for Florence, which Dante shares enthusiastically.  These men are 'good \softline
Guelphs,' as Farinata was a 'good Ghibelline,' leaders who put true concerns for the city over \softline
those of party, as Dante surely believed he himself did.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-63.}{\plain \fs24   Dante identifies himself, out of modesty we presume, as a fellow Florentine and \softline
not by name.  His heavenly destination is enough by way of reward to let him wish to remain \softline
modestly anonymous.  His reference to the good 'deeds' (}{\plain \fs24 \i ovra}{\plain \fs24 ) of these souls joins, in a series of \softline
moments with positive things to say about some of Florence's citizens, with Brunetto's reference \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XV.60) to Dante's own political work (}{\plain \fs24 \i opera}{\plain \fs24 ) on behalf of Florence, and to the passage that \softline
initiated these concerns, with specific reference to Guido Guerra and Iacopo Rusticucci (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VI. \softline
79-81), when Dante spoke with Ciacco of the good deeds of some of Florence's citizens.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 64-72.}{\plain \fs24   Iacopo's question offers Dante an opportunity to stage one of his frequent \softline
invectives against human depravity, especially of the Florentine sort.  Guglielmo Borsiere, only \softline
recently arrived at this station, has been telling his fellows that the 'good old days' are so no longer \softline
(while we have a secure date of death only for Guido Guerra [1272], we imagine that his other \softline
two companions also have been in hell for a quarter century or so: Florence is much changed).  \softline
Guglielmo, of whom we know little, was, as his last name informs us, probably a pursemaker.  \softline
Courtesy (in the sense of decency toward one's fellows but more in the wider sense of a whole \softline
courtly code of living) and valor (in the sense of paying attention to the worth of things in one's \softline
own conduct) are thus societal values reflected in individual behavior.  Find them in Florence \softline
today?  Dante's answer will be firmly negative.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 73-75.}{\plain \fs24   The 'new rich,' having moved in from the surrounding countryside, are without any \softline
valor and courtesy, and already the civic price is being paid.  Dante's brief but strongly phrased \softline
remark is filled with personal -- and bitter -- experience.  We should probably remember the \softline
earlier denunciation of the original Fiesolan 'barbarian' incursions into pure 'Roman' Florence (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XV.61-78).  This moment of rhetorical elevation marks the only place that the name of the city \softline
about which the canto is so largely concerned is allowed to appear.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 76.}{\plain \fs24   Dante approximates the gesture of an Old Testament prophet, calling for divine \softline
retribution, raising his eyes and voice rather to heaven than, as some commentators propose, to \softline
Florence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 82-85.}{\plain \fs24   Like Ciacco (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VI.88 -- and few others in hell) these men have the confidence in 
the force of the good that they did on earth to want to be remembered above, even though they \softline
are condemned to eternal punishment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab This is the only time in hell that several sinners speak harmoniously as one.  And what is \softline
also notable is their reference to the stars that shine over earth now, the only reference to them \softline
until we come to the concluding line of the }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIV.139), when Dante and Virgil see \softline
them once again.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Beginning with Daniello (who borrowed the notice from his teacher, Trifon Gabriele) \softline
commentators have remarked on the similarity of the sentiments expressed in their words 'when \softline
you shall rejoice in saying "I was there"' to Aeneas's words to his storm-tossed men (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . I.203): \softline
'forsan et haec olim meminisse iuvabit' (perhaps one day it will be a joy to recall even such events \softline
as these).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 88-89.}{\plain \fs24   When this group hurries off to rejoin their fellows (as did Brunetto his), the poet \softline
describes their flight as taking no more time than it takes to say 'Amen.'  The detail also probably \softline
implies, as it were, an illicit prayer for them on Dante's part, as though the protagonist, in \softline
response to their kind words, accepted their prayer for his return to the world, and would like to \softline
offer one for them in return.  In a sense, the poet's positive treatment of them in this canto is the \softline
fulfillment of that wish.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 91-93.}{\plain \fs24   The sound of water heard in the opening lines of the canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVI.1-3) is now, \softline
since Dante and Virgil have descended the sloping sand toward the center of hell, much louder.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 94-105.}{\plain \fs24   Dante, fond of the rivers of Italy as sources for poetic 'digressions,' describes the \softline
Acquacheta (its name means 'quiet water') as being joined by the Riodestro near its source in the \softline
Apennines, and then changing name (to 'Montone') at Forl{\f2 \'58}, before it flows into the Adriatic Sea \softline
just south of Ravenna without pouring first into the Po, the major river of the region.  At its \softline
source at San Benedetto dell'Alpe, the meaning seems to be (and Petrocchi's text is much debated \softline
here), when the river was not in flood, forming the cascade referred to, it might have consisted in \softline
only a thousand rivulets.  Phlegethon, descending into Cocytus, is here a waterfall resembling the \softline
Acquacheta in flood.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Perhaps mirroring the length of the river it describes, the simile here is the longest yet \softline
found in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  (the two closest challengers occur at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.112-120 and }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XV.4-12; but the \softline
thirteen cantos of Malebolge will at first equal and finally outdo any other area of the poem for \softline
length of simile: }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXI.7-18; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXII.1-12; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIV.1-18; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVIII.7-21; and the \softline
'champion,' }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXX.1-27).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 106-108.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's cord is now retrospectively added to the details of the scene in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  I \softline
(as the full moon will be added to that scene in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XX.127-129).  The cord has the function of \softline
holding his robes together, but symbolically may also reflect the cincture of one who attempts to \softline
'gird his loins' and live right.  For bibliography of various interpretations of the cord's significance \softline
see Roberto Mercuri (}{\plain \fs24 \i Semantica di Gerione}{\plain \fs24  [Rome: Bulzoni, 1984]), pp. 14n.-17n.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Over the years, some commentators have tried to make the case that the cord is that of a \softline
Franciscan garment, and that Dante was a member of the (lay) Third Order of Franciscans.  This \softline
may be true (most doubt it), but the }{\plain \fs24 \i corda}{\plain \fs24  would offer no proof at all, since Dante knew the \softline
technical name for the cord that bound the garment of a Franciscan: the }{\plain \fs24 \i capestro}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.92).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab This passage is linked to the question of the identity of the three beasts encountered by \softline
Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  I.  See the note to vv. 32-54 of that canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 109-114.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil pitches Dante's coiled-up cord into the abyss apparently as a challenge to \softline
a creature somewhere down there.  The poet builds suspense for the apparition of that creature, \softline
whose appearance is delayed until the beginning of the next canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 115-123.  }{\plain \fs24 Does Virgil read Dante's thoughts or is he simply so sensitive to Dante's way of \softline
reacting to events that he can understand what his pupil must be thinking?  For a convincing \softline
statement in support of the second thesis, with review of the various other passages in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  in \softline
which Virgil might seem to be claiming for himself the sort of intellective powers that Beatrice \softline
will possess (she }{\plain \fs24 \i does}{\plain \fs24  read the pilgrim's mind), see Musa, "Virgil Reads the Pilgrim's Mind," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  95 (1977), pp. 149-52.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 124-132.}{\plain \fs24   The rhetorical energy increases as Dante swears to each of us, his readers, that \softline
he actually saw the creature he is about to describe.  It is Geryon (only named at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVII.97, but \softline
see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVII.1-3), as mythical a monster as one can find and, as Castelvetro \softline
complained in his commentary, in Dante's handling not even resemblant of any of the descriptions \softline
of him found in classical literature (again, see the note to XVII.1-3).  In other words, Dante has \softline
put the veracity of the entire }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24  (here named for the first of only two times [the second \softline
occurs at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXI.2]) upon the reality of Geryon.  Where such as Ferrucci ("Comed{\f1\u237\'ed}a," }{\plain \fs24 \i Yearbook \softline
of Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24  1 [1971], pp. 29-52) use the passage to argue that Dante here obviously admits \softline
that his poem is no 'historical' record of an 'actual' journey, Hollander ("Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i Theologus-Poeta}{\plain \fs24 ," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  94 [1976]), pp. 111-12; 132-33, bases his countering argument in his perception \softline
that the ground for Dante's choice of the 'allegory of the theologians' for the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24  lay in his \softline
battle with St. Thomas over the literal untruth of poetry; thus, according to him, Dante 'claims \softline
that his poem is literally true while tacitly admitting that he has made it all up' (p. 133).  The \softline
difference between these two positions may seem slight, but is major, for one reads the poem \softline
differently according as one admits or denies the applicability of theological allegory to its making \softline
and to its understanding.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For Dante's distinctions between tragedy and comedy see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX.106-114.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Guido da Pisa (comm. to XVI.124-126) suggests that there are four kinds of statements \softline
relating to truth and falsehood: there are those that (1) are both true and true-seeming ('I saw a \softline
lion eating a lamb'); (2) false and false-seeming ('I saw an ass fly'); (3) false yet true-seeming ('I \softline
saw Peter eating meat on Friday'); (4) true yet false-seeming ('I saw an ass who had killed a lion' -- the latter event, Guido explains, once occurred in Florence).  Boccaccio's discussion of the way \softline
in which true but false-seeming statements bring shame upon their speaker has it that 'those who \softline
hear them make fun of him and say that he is a terrible liar' (comm. to vv. 124-126) may also \softline
reveal the first Dante professor's knowing smile at his beloved Dante's outrageous claims for \softline
truth-telling.  Had these commentators or Dante himself read Aristotle's }{\plain \fs24 \i Poetics}{\plain \fs24 , they all might \softline
have reflected upon Aristotle's advice -- here not taken by Dante -- to the playwright to avoid \softline
describing events that really have occurred if they in fact seem unlikely to have done so.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For one participant (Sperone Speroni) in the sixteenth-century debate over the nature of \softline
the truth purveyed in Dante's poem, see Stefano Jossa, "La 'verit{\f2 \'42}' della }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 .  I }{\plain \fs24 \i Discorsi 
sopra Dante}{\plain \fs24  di Sperone Speroni," }{\plain \fs24 \i Rivista di Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  1 (2001), pp. 221-41, a discussion \softline
based in a study by Bernard Weinberg, "The Quarrel over Dante," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i A History of Literary \softline
Criticism}{\plain \fs24 , II (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961), pp. 819-911.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 124.}{\plain \fs24   Frank Ordiway's article, 'Brunetto and Dante,' completed in draft ca. 1992 but still \softline
under revision, makes the point that Dante's phrase 'faccia di menzogna ' (face of falsehood) bears \softline
a striking resemblance to Brunetto's 'face de men{\f1\u231\'e7}oigne' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Tresor}{\plain \fs24  II.lviii.17: 'La verit{\f1\u233\'e9}s a maintes \softline
fois face de men{\f1\u231\'e7}oigne, et men{\f1\u231\'e7}oigne est couverte en semblance de verit{\f1\u233\'e9}'), as has now been \softline
noted by Emilio Pasquini, }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e le figure del vero: La fabbrica della "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  (Milan: \softline
Bruno Mondadori, 2001), p. 79.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 133-136.}{\plain \fs24   The concluding simile asks the reader to imagine a detail that cannot be seen: \softline
'something other hidden in the sea'; one might argue that precisely this inability to describe what \softline
cannot be seen marks the guarantee of Dante's 'realistic' descriptive narrative.  Makers of 'fictions' \softline
operate under no such limit.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For Geryon as }{\plain \fs24 \i palombaro}{\plain \fs24 , that is, a man who releases anchors from the ojects they attach \softline
to and then pulls himself back up to the surface by a cord thrown into the water with him, see \softline
Ignazio Baldelli ("Un errore lessicografico: 'palombaro' e Gerione palombaro," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Omaggio a \softline
Gianfranco Folena}{\plain \fs24  [Padua: Editoriale Programma, 1993], pp. 243-49).\par
}}