{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fswiss \fcharset0 \fprq2 Arial;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 10}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-2.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The path is 'hidden' because it lies between the walls of Dis and the sepulchers.  See \softline
Virgil, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.443, the 'secreti calles' that lead into the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lugentes Campi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Field of Mourning) \softline
where Aeneas encounters the mournful spirit of Dido.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 5.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante is apparently alluding to the new direction, to the right, in which Virgil is now \softline
leading him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The image of the uncovered tombs and the reference to 'guards,' as Durling and \softline
Martinez point out in their commentary (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The "Divine Comedy" of Dante Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Notes by R. \softline
M. Durling and Ronald Martinez [New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 1996]), suggest details of the scene surrounding the death and resurrection of Jesus.  The actual \softline
position of the covering slabs of these funeral monuments is not clear.  The passage in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XI.6 would make it appear that they may be propped against the sides of the tombs, as Durling \softline
and Martinez suggest.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 11.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Jehosaphat is the valley in Palestine in which, according to Joel 3:2, all will gather for \softline
the Last Judgment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 14-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Epicurus, celebrated Greek philosopher, B.C. 342-270; he started at Athens the \softline
philosophic school called after him, which taught that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 summum bonum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or highest good, is \softline
happiness -- not sensual enjoyment, but peace of mind, as the result of the cultivation of the \softline
virtues.  He held that virtue was to be practised because it led to happiness, whereas the Stoics \softline
held that virtue should be cultivated for its own sake' (cited from Toynbee, "Epicuro," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise \softline
Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 (1898)]).  While in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.vi.11-12) Dante \softline
defines Epicureanism as the pleasure principle without speaking of it as specifically heretical, here \softline
he falls in with a more stringent Christian view, perhaps echoing St. Paul who, in I Corinthians \softline
15:32, cites the standard tag for Epicureanism, 'Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die,' as \softline
the unworthy countering view to the Resurrection.  It is in keeping with this attitude that Dante \softline
presents 'Epicureans' as those who deny the immortality of the soul.  For a full discussion along \softline
these lines of the change in attitude toward the Epicureans from Ciceronian to a more 'orthodox' \softline
view see Joseph A. Mazzeo, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medieval Cultural Tradition in Dante's "Comedy"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Ithaca: Cornell \softline
University Press, 1960), pp. 174-204.  And for a possible source of Dante's phrasing see \softline
Mazzoni's gloss to a verse in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V (62): "Il canto V dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 " (Lectura Dantis Romana: \softline
Letture degli anni 1973-76; Rome: Bonacci, 1977), p. 137, suggesting that Servius's gloss to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.34, 'dicit autem secundum Epicureos, qui animam cum corpore dicunt perire,' may \softline
inform Dante's choice of words.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See the wish expressed by Dante in vv. 6-8, above, which Virgil realizes hides Dante's \softline
real desire: he hopes to see, now that he is among 'the blacker souls' where Ciacco had said he \softline
would find Farinata and four other Florentines (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.85), some or one of these, and perhaps the \softline
first he there named, Farinata.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante, once chidden by Virgil for his curiosity (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.76-78), has been keeping 
that curiosity under wraps.  Nonetheless, Virgil has him figured out.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The speaker is Farinata degli Uberti: 'Manente, called Farinata, son of Jacopo degli \softline
Uberti, the "Saviour of Florence," was born in Florence at the beginning of Century xiii; while still \softline
a boy he witnessed the introduction into the city of the Guelf and Ghibelline factions, of the latter \softline
of which his family became the leaders; in 1239 be became the head of his house, and in 1248 he \softline
took a prominent part in the expulsion of the Guelfs, who however returned in 1251, and a few \softline
years later (in 1258) expelled the Ghibellines in their turn, Farinata among them; the latter, who \softline
was now acknowledged head of his party, took refuge with the rest of the Ghibelline exiles in \softline
Siena, where he organized the measures which led to the crushing defeat of the Florentine Guelfs \softline
and their allies at Montaperti, and left the Ghibellines masters of Tuscany (Sept. 4, 1260).  After \softline
their victory the Ghibellines held a council at Empoli, about twenty miles from Florence, at which \softline
it was proposed, in order to put an end once for all to the power of the Florentines, that the city \softline
of Florence should be razed to the ground.  To this proposal, which was generally approved, \softline
Farinata offered the most determined opposition, declaring that he would defend his native city \softline
with his own sword as long as he had breath in his body, even though he should have to do it \softline
single-handed.  In consequence of this protest the proposal was abandoned and Florence was \softline
saved from destruction.  The Florentines subsequently showed little gratitude to Farinata for his \softline
patriotic intervention, for they always expressly included the Uberti with the other Ghibelline \softline
families who were excepted from the terms offered to the other exiles.  After Montaperti Farinata \softline
returned to Florence, where he died in or about 1264, the year before Dante's birth' (cited from \softline
Toynbee, "Farinata," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 (1898)]).  For \softline
bibliography on his significance to Dante see Anthony K. Cassell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Fearful Art of Justice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984]), p. 117.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab His manner is both courteous and firm, that of a man used to command.  Dante is \softline
obviously more than a little flustered, and needs to be reassured by Virgil (vv. 29-31).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ever since the time of Guido da Pisa (1328?) commentators have, on occasion, noted \softline
the echo here of the words of the bystanders who heard Peter deny his knowledge of Christ a \softline
second time; surely, they say, you are one of his followers from Galilee, for your speech makes \softline
you plainly so ('loquela tua manifestum te facit' -- Matthew 26:73).  See Guido{\u8219\'27}s comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
X.25-27.  Pier Angelo Perotti ("Farinata, Dante e Pietro," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  31 [1990], pp. 3-7) seems \softline
unaware of his precursors in this observation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Against the more usual understanding, that Farinata's 'forse' (perhaps) reveals regret \softline
at his harshness against his fellow citizens at the battle of Montaperti, consider the judgment of \softline
Cassell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Fearful Art of Justice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984]), p. 19): \softline
Farinata displays 'the false modesty of gloating understatement.'  And see Christopher Kleinhenz, \softline
"The Poetics of Citation: Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and the Bible," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italiana 1988: Selected \softline
Papers from the Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Conference of the American Association of \softline
Teachers of Italian, November 18-20, 1988, Monterey, CA}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ., ed. Albert N. Mancini, Paolo A. \softline
Giordano, and Anthony J. Tamburri [= }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rosary College Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 (1990)], pp. 13-14,  for a \softline
possible source in Micah (6:3) of Farinata's statement: 'Popule meus, quid feci tibi?  Aut quid \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 molestus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  fui tibi?' (O my people, what have I done to thee? and wherein have I wearied thee?).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 32.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Farinata, who did not believe in Christ's resurrection, here replays it, as it were, rising \softline
from his tomb, at this instant making his punishment clearly fit his crime.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.viii.8 \softline
for Dante's own outcry against such failure of belief: 'Dico che intra tutte le bestialitadi quello {\f3 \'50} \softline
stoltissima, vilissima e dannosissima, chi crede dopo questa vita non essere altra vita' (I say that of \softline
all the follies the most foolish, the basest, and the most pernicious is the belief that beyond this life \softline
there is no other [tr. Lansing]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Rising like the bust of a Roman emperor out of his tomb, and as Durling ("Farinata \softline
and the Body of Christ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1981], pp. 11-14) and Cassell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's \softline
Fearful Art of Justice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984], pp. 24-26) have \softline
independently discovered, still more importantly, in imitation of the 'Man of Sorrows' (see Isaiah \softline
53:3: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 virum dolorum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), that image (the so-called }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imago pietatis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) of Jesus rising from the tomb, \softline
naked, showing the signs of his torture, not yet having taken on majesty.  With this image in our \softline
minds, Farinata's heresy seems all the less pardonable, since Christ had come and suffered for him, \softline
too.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 35.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That the features of Farinata upon which Dante fastens are his chest and brow \softline
underlines his prideful nature.  And pride, which we have seen behind the sinful actions of such as \softline
Filippo Argenti in canto VIII, the 'root sin' that stands behind so much human failure in the eyes of \softline
Dante's Church, is easily understood as a root of heresy, the stiff-necked refusal to believe what \softline
has been given as manifest by Christ and his Church.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Farinata's 'heroic' stance has pleased at least Romantic readers, who are driven to \softline
enthusiastic approval of his disdain (see also }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.41) for the hell that contains him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Perhaps mindful of the way in which his pupil ran on when he spoke with Francesca, \softline
far more eager to share in her experience than to learn from it, Virgil warns Dante to control his \softline
speech.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Farinata's first words reveal his pride in familial background.  He is an Uberti and a \softline
Ghibelline; let all others tremble before him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's self-identification as minor nobility and a Guelph does not much impress \softline
Farinata, who raises his eyebrows -- another sign of his pridefulness.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIV.35, \softline
where Satan is described as having raised his brows against God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Farinata now wins the second round of his little battle with Dante: yes, he knows \softline
Dante's people, and twice over has sent them into exile (1248 and 1260).  This canto's scenes play \softline
out against a series of dates spread over the second half of the thirteenth century in Florence: \softline
1248, expulsion of the Guelphs; 1258, expulsion of the Ghibellines; 1260, Montaperti and the \softline
second explusion of the Guelphs; 1264, death of Farinata; 1266, defeat of Manfred and the \softline
imperial forces at the battle of Benevento and banishment of the Uberti family; 1280, death of \softline
Cavalcante the elder; 1289, battle of Campaldino, another Guelph triumph (in which Dante took \softline
part); 1290, death of Beatrice; 1300, death of Guido Cavalcanti; 1302, exile of Dante Alighieri.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   But now the little Guelph bites back: our family was twice exiled and came back \softline
home twice; yours has not done quite so well (since the Uberti have remained in exile since the \softline
aftermath of the battle of Benevento in 1266).  We witness again, as we did in the scene with \softline
Filippo Argenti, Dante's revisitation of the poetic form of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VIII.31-39).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The reader may note that the adjective 'Yours' in v. 51 is capitalized.  We have followed \softline
the practice of capitalizing the English translation of the honorific plural form for the singular 'you' \softline
and 'yours,' so as to alert the reader to their use in Dante's Italian.  Only three Florentines in hell \softline
receive this treatment: Farinata and Cavalcante here, and Brunetto Latini in canto XV.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The interruption of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  between Dante and Farinata will last for seven \softline
tercets, until Farinata, 'on hold' while this other drama is played out, will continue the \softline
conversation as though there had been no interruption to it.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The far less imposing figure who rises out of the same tomb alongside Farinata is \softline
Cavalcante de' Cavalcanti (died ca. 1280), a Guelph and the father of Dante's former 'first friend' \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1   III.14, XXIV.6, XXX.3), Guido Cavalcanti.  Since Guido was alive at the imagined date \softline
of Dante's journey, he cannot be found in the afterworld.  However, his reputation as a \softline
'materialist' makes it seem at least likely that Dante was certain that this aristocratic and \softline
independent-minded poet and thinker was coming right here to join his father.  It is not accidental \softline
that the entire conversation between the father and his son's former friend concerns that son.  If \softline
Farinata believes in family and party, Cavalcante is the archetypal doting father.  Their portraits, \softline
showing them in such different lights, are perhaps the finest example we have of such close, \softline
contrastive 'portraiture' in verse since the classical era.  See the study of Erich Auerbach, "Farinata \softline
and Cavalcante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western Literature}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , tr. W. Trask \softline
(New York: Doubleday Anchor, 1957 [1946]), pp. 151-77.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab One of the finest lyric poets of his time, Guido Cavalcanti was from six to ten years older \softline
than Dante.  He was married by his family to a woman named Beatrice, in fact the daughter of \softline
Farinata.  In other words, these two heretical Florentines are in-laws; it is notable that, divided by \softline
party loyalty as they are, they do not speak to one another.  Guido was an ardent Guelph, siding \softline
with the Whites (Dante's party also) when the Guelphs divided into two factions.  He had a street \softline
brawl with the leader of the Black Guelphs, Corso Donati, who had once tried to kill him.  'In the \softline
summer of 1300, during Dante's priorate (June 15-Aug. 15), it was decided (June 24), in order to \softline
put an end to the disturbances caused by the continued hostilities between the two factions, to \softline
banish the leaders of both sides,... among those who approved this decision being Dante, in his \softline
capacity as Prior.  It thus came about that Dante was instrumental in sending his own friend into \softline
exile, and, as it proved, to his death; for though the exiles were recalled very shortly after the \softline
expiry of Dante's term of office (Aug. 15), so that Guido only spent a few weeks at Sarzana, he \softline
never recovered from the effects of the malarious climate of the place, and died in Florence at the \softline
end of August in that same year; he was buried in the cemetery of Santa Reparata on Aug. 29...' \softline
(cited from Toynbee, "Cavalcanti, Guido," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 \softline
(1898)]).  One might wish to consider the fact that each of these two main characters, one \softline
Ghibelline and one Guelf, in the sepulchral scene of this canto had been banished by the Priors of \softline
Florence, Farinata in 1258, Cavalcanti in 1300.  And mindful of the afterlives of these two exiles \softline
is the exiled Dante Alighieri, former Prior, now himself exiled by the Priors of the city.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab On his 'Epicureanism,' or failure to believe in the existence of a soul that lived beyond the 
life of the bodily senses, see the commentary of Boccaccio (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.64-66): Guido was a \softline
'leggiadro e ricco cavaliere, e segu{\f3 \'58} l'oppinion d'Epicuro in non credere che l'anima dopo la morte \softline
del corpo vivesse e che il nostro sommo bene fosse ne' diletti carnali; e per questo, s{\f3 \'58} come \softline
eretico, {\f3 \'50} dannato' (a charming and wealthy gentleman; he followed Epicurus{\u8217\'92}s opinion in not \softline
believing that the soul lived on after the death of the body and that our highest good was found in \softline
carnal delight; and for this he is damned as a heretic).  Salimbene da Parma, in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cronica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , also \softline
reports that Guido used the text of the Bible (Ecclesiastes 3:19: 'The lot of man and beast is one, \softline
and their condition is the same') to demonstrate that the soul dies with the body (cited by \softline
Singleton [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.53]).  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For review of the recent spate of articles on the problem of the adverse relationship \softline
between Guido and Dante as represented by Guido's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Donna me prega}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) and Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita \softline
nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Nicol{\f3 \'62} Pasero, "Dante in Cavalcanti: ancora sui rapporti tra }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  e }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Donna me \softline
prega}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  22 (1998), pp. 388-414.  While the problem of the dating of the two \softline
works remains central, it does seem that, at some point in the 1290s, Dante and Guido had a \softline
falling out, and that these two works clearly reflect it.  Barolini ("Dante and Cavalcanti [On \softline
Making Distinctions in Matters of Love]: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V in Its Lyric Context," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  116 \softline
[1998]), pp. 60-63, points out that the evidence that we currently possess does not allow certainty \softline
in this matter, but that we can say that there clearly was a dispute between the two former friends \softline
that is mirrored in the two works.  For an earlier suggestion that Dante was setting himself up as \softline
an opposer of Guido from the beginning of the poem, see Bacchelli's opinion, referred to at the \softline
end of the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.86-87.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's phrase, 'cieco carcere' (dark prison), has long been considered an echo of the \softline
same words in Virgil's Latin, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 carcere caeco}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.734.  For a consideration of the \softline
essential differences between the Virgilian and the Dantean afterworld see M.C.J. Putnam, \softline
'Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,' in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Poetry of Allusion: Virgil and Ovid in Dante's "Commedia,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. R. \softline
Jacoff and J. T. Schnapp (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1991), pp. 94-112.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 59.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrase 'per altezza d'ingegno' (by virtue of your lofty genius) is clearly meant to \softline
remind us of the similar phrase we heard in Dante's first invocation: 'O Muse, o alto ingegno' (O \softline
Muses, O lofty genius -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.7).  However, how we are to interpret the resemblance is not \softline
easily resolved.  Those who believe that in the first passage Dante was invoking his own poetic \softline
powers see in Cavalcanti's doting father's reaction a simple sense of rivalry: which of these two \softline
poets is more gifted?  If, on the other hand, we believe that Dante, in the invocation, calls for aid \softline
from a Higher Power (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.7), then the father's question indicates that he doesn't \softline
understand, materialist that he is, the nature of true Christian poetic inspiration.  His son's genius \softline
and that inspiring Dante are not commensurable.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Cavalcante's mournful question about his son's whereabouts has reminded some \softline
commentators (perhaps the first was Daniello, in 1568 [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.52-63]) of Andromache's \softline
equally mournful question about the whereabouts of her husband Hector, 'Hector ubi est?' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IV.312).  But see Durling ("Farinata and the Body of Christ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1981]), \softline
p. 25n., arguing for the resonance of Genesis 4:9: 'Ubi est Abel frater tuus?' (Where is Abel your \softline
brother?).  Durling points out that both these 'fratricidal' stories culminate in an exile, Cain sent \softline
forth from the land a fugitive (Genesis 4:12-16), while Guido was literally sent into exile by the 
action of Dante and the five other Priors of Florence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's words may reflect the Gospel of John (8:28) when Jesus says 'a meipso facio \softline
nihil' (I do nothing of myself), but only through the Father.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 62-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   One of the most debated passages in the poem.  For a recent review, with \softline
bibliography, see Hollander ("Dante and Cino da Pistoia," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  110 [1992]), pp. 204-6, \softline
222-23.  Following the lead of Isidoro Del Lungo ("Il disdegno di Guido," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuova Antologia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [1 \softline
nov. 1889], pp. 59-60) and Guglielmo Gorni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il nodo della lingua: studi in Dante e altri \softline
duecenteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence, Olschki, 1981], pp. 134-39), Hollander argues for the shaping influence \softline
of a sonnet by Cino da Pistoia ('Qua' son le cose vostre ch'io vi tolgo,' written in answer to a [lost] \softline
rather nasty sonnet by Guido attacking }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 him}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) on the key words in this passage, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 disdegno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ingegno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , words found in Cino's sonnet implying exactly these qualities to Guido in unflattering \softline
ways (and now see Raffaele Pinto, {\u8220\'93}Sensi smarriti: La ermeneutica del disdegno in Cavalcanti e \softline
Dante [II],{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [2001], pp. 57-59).  If this hypothesis is correct, then those in the debate \softline
over the reference of the pronoun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cui}{\plain \fs24 \f1  who believe it refers to Beatrice are strongly supported.  \softline
Others believe it refers to Virgil (and still others, a much smaller number, believe it refers to God).  \softline
It should be noted that our translation is interpretive; the Italian can mean either what we have \softline
said it does or else 'whom perhaps your Guido held in scorn,' in which case it would refer to \softline
Virgil.  The text thus either indicates that Guido at a certain point perhaps scorned the work of \softline
Virgil or else withdrew his approval of Dante's love of Beatrice, to whom perhaps Dante is being \softline
led, as Virgil has promised him (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.122-123).  For support of the 'candidacy' of Beatrice see \softline
Paolo Cherchi, "Il disdegno per Guido: una proposta," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  11 (1970), pp. 73-78; \softline
"Cavalcanti e la rappresentazione," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Critica del testo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 (2001), pp. 42-43.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For an inconclusive but interesting discussion of the force of the past definite of the verb \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ebbe}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here, see Singleton ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X: Guido's Disdain," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  77 [1962], pp. \softline
49-65).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The father's premature lament for his living son (but he }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 will}{\plain \fs24 \f1  be dead in four \softline
months) in this searing tercet obviously collects the difficult thoughts and feelings of the poet as \softline
well.  There has been a great deal written about Dante's use of the past definite ('egli ebbe' [he \softline
had]) and its possible consequences.  Why did Dante say that (verse 63)?  Had Guido scorned \softline
someone habitually, the use of the imperfect would have been more likely.  Those who believe \softline
that his scorn was for Virgil (roughly half of those who involve themselves in this quarrel) are \softline
right to be puzzled, for such a scornful view of the Latin poet would not seem to have been a \softline
sudden shift of attitude (and, in fact, there is no Virgilian element in any of Guido's poems).  An \softline
attractive alternative explanation is given by Siro Chimenz in his commentary (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
X.61-63), repeating findings he first offered in 1945: at a certain point in his relations with Dante, \softline
and at least after Beatrice's death, when Dante continued to write of her, Guido }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 did}{\plain \fs24 \f1  come to have \softline
disdain for Dante's loyalty to Beatrice.  In short, Dante the protagonist is thinking of Guido's \softline
climactic 'rejection' of Beatrice as a definite past event, one perhaps precisely reflected in a sonnet \softline
Guido wrote to Dante expressing his disgust with his former friend ('I' vegno 'l giorno a te 'nfinite \softline
volte').  For the current state of the question involving Dante{\u8217\'92}s difficult eventual relationship with \softline
Guido see Enrico Malato, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e Guido Cavalcanti: il dissidio per la {\u8220\'93}Vita nuova{\u8221\'94} e il \softline
{\u171\'ab}disdegno{\u187\'bb} di Guido}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Rome: Salerno, 1997). and Mauro Cursietti, "Dante, Guido e l'{\u171\'ab}annoiosa 
gente{\u187\'bb}," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  11 (1998), pp. 105-12\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the echoes heard in Cavalcante{\u8219\'27}s heart-broken question of both }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.310-312 \softline
and Genesis 4:9, see the note to verse 30.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Cavalcante's sudden disappearance rounds out his version of 'resurrection,' one \softline
that fails.  In his first line he 'came up' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 surse}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) but in his last he falls back (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ricadde}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) into his eternal \softline
tomb.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Farinata's Stoic restraint is evident once again; he has been waiting to regain \softline
Dante's attention in order to continue their difficult conversation about Florentine politics.  \softline
Unmoved and unmoving, he is the exemplification of the 'stone man' admired by Stoic \softline
philosophers.  He is 'great-souled' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 magnanimo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), a quality of the highest kind in Aristotle's \softline
formulation in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ethics}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , but one connected, even in classical times, with a fear that such a man \softline
may also be prideful.  See Scott (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante magnanimo; studi sulla "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, \softline
1977]) pp. 13-45, for the double valence of the term, which becomes less even potentially positive \softline
in the works of Christian writers.  Returning to the question in 1997, Scott ("Dante Jottings," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 In amicizia: Essays in Honour of Giulio Lepschy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Z.G. Baranski and L. Pertile (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Italianist}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
17 [1997--special supplement]), pp. 117-26) argues that the adjective may refer not only to \softline
Farinata ('that other one'), but to the class of which he is a part.  Scott is doubtless correct to \softline
suggest that 'that other one,' applied to Farinata, at least implies a 'this one,' referring to \softline
Cavalcante, with whom Dante has been conversing.  And 'this' shade would then be equally \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 magnanimo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as that one.  It is an interesting argument; the insistent reference to Farinata, \softline
however, once the spotlight is turned back on him, may eventually erode its ability to convince.  \softline
There is, of course, also the possibility that, in Dante's copy, the adjective and the noun were \softline
appositive, i.e., that he wrote 'quell'altro, magnanimo, a cui'--we will never know.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Farinata, more human in his second conversation, admits his sense of frustration in \softline
his family's political misfortune; it is, he says, worse torment even than damnation.  We may \softline
reflect that, in the universe of this poem, there should be no worse torment than damnation.  \softline
Nonetheless, Farinata exudes a certain selfless concern for his family.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bested by Dante's last }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 riposte}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Farinata now gets even with a prophecy: within \softline
fifty months (fifty moons; Proserpina, the moon, is traditionally referred to as queen of hell) Dante \softline
himself will know the pain of exile.  There surely seems to be fellow-feeling joined to the bleak \softline
promise.  By July of 1304 -- roughly fifty months from March of 1300 -- the last efforts of the \softline
Whites to re-enter Florence were over and done with (Dante had already given up on their \softline
efforts), and Dante had come to know that his exile was, for all intents and purposes, limitless.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having now characterized Dante as a fellow-sufferer at the hands of their fellow \softline
citizens, Farinata wants to know why his Ghibelline family seems to have been singled out by the \softline
actions of the Priors.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's answer offers the perhaps sole }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 locus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in this canto that directly relates \softline
heresy and politics -- and surely the reader has wondered what the connection must be.  The \softline
'prayers' in the church that he refers to are words uttered in viturative political councils, thus 
creating an image of political intrigue, even if of Guelph against Ghibelline, as a form of deformed \softline
'religious' activity.  Florence seems a city in which politics have become the state religion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The Arbia is a river near the site of the battle of Montaperti.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 89-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Farinata{\u8217\'92}s last words on the subject of the Florentine past remind his auditor that \softline
he was no more guilty than the rest of the Ghibellines (and many of them have been allowed to \softline
return) and that, further, at the council of Empoli (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.22-24), he was alone in \softline
defending the city from destruction.  There is no question but that Dante's view of Farinata is \softline
complex.  As hard as he is on him, there is also great admiration for some of his qualities as \softline
leader, and for his having stood alone, and successfully, in defense of the city.  The drama of \softline
Ghibellinism for Dante is a central one; what these people want to accomplish politically is not in \softline
itself anathema to him  -- far from it; that they wish to achieve their aims without God is what \softline
destroys their credentials as politicians and as human beings.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having realized that Cavalcanti does not know that his son is alive, while Farinata \softline
seems to know the future, Dante asks for clarification.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 \ul0 \tab 100-108. }{\plain \fs24 \f1  Farinata explains that the present and the near future are not known by the \softline
sinners, only the time to come.  Most believe that what he says applies to all the damned, e.g., \softline
Singleton in his commentary to this passage (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.100-105).  On the other hand, for the view \softline
that this condition pertains only to the heretics see Cassell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Fearful Art of Justice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984]), pp. 29-31.  But see Alberigo, his soul already in \softline
hell yet not knowing how or what its body is now doing in the world above (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.122-123).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The {\u8216\'91}portals of the future close{\u8217\'92} at Judgment Day, after which there shall be {\u8216\'91}no more \softline
time{\u8217\'92} (Apoc. 10:6).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's excuses his 'fault': until Farinata explained things, he assumed the \softline
damned were aware of present events.  Given the historical situation between the poet and \softline
Cavlacanti, it is not surprising that the author stages the drama of his understandable guilt at his \softline
role in Guido's death in this somewhat strained way.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil does not seem to think his pupil's effort at apology very important: it is \softline
time to move on.  Dante hurriedly asks for news of other heretics down here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 119.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Frederick II (1194-1250), King of Sicily and Naples (1212-50), known in his own \softline
day as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stupor mundi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the wonder of the world) for his extraordinary verve and accomplishments, \softline
presided over one of the most glorious courts in Europe.  His political battles with the papacy \softline
marked nearly the full extent of his reign (he was the victorious leader of the Sixth Crusade \softline
[1228-29], 'won' by treaty, while he was under interdict of excommunication).  As exemplary of \softline
the Guelph view of him see Salimbene: 'Erat enim epicureus, et ideo quidquid poterat invenire in \softline
divina scriptura per se et per sapientes suos quod faceret ad ostendendum quod non esset alia vita \softline
post mortem, totum inveniebat' (For he was an Epicurean, and as a result whatever he could find \softline
in holy scripture itself, or from those who knew the scripture, that would help demonstrate that \softline
there were no life after death, he totally set himself to finding -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cronica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  For a recent overview 
of the ambience of Frederick II's court see Roberto Antonelli, "La corte 'italiana' di Federico II e \softline
la letteratura europea," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Federico II e le nuove culture (Atti del XXXI Convegno storico \softline
internazionale, Todi, 9-12 ottobre 1994)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Spoleto, Centro Italiano di Studi sull'Alto Medioevo, \softline
1995, pp. 319-45.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Cardinal Ottaviano degli Ubaldini, member of a powerful Tuscan Ghibelline family, \softline
known to his contemporaries as "the Cardinal" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 par excellence}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , was brother of Ubaldino della Pila \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.29) and uncle of the Archbishop Ruggieri (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.14); he was made Bishop of \softline
Bologna in 1240, when he was under thirty, by special dispensation of Pope Gregory IX, and in \softline
1244 he was created Cardinal by Innocent IV at the Council of Lyons; he was papal legate in \softline
Lombardy, and died in 1272.  [He] was suspected of favouring the imperial party, and is credited \softline
with a saying: "If I have a soul, I have lost it a thousand times for the Ghibellines"' (the remark is \softline
cited by literally every fourteenth-century commentator found in the DDP).  The passage is cited \softline
from Paget Toynbee, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 [1898]), "Cardinale, \softline
Il."\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante is considering the dire event, his exile, that Farinata has predicted (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.79-81).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 125.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word used by Virgil to describe Dante's difficulty is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 smarrito}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a word that has \softline
been associated with the protagonist's initial lost and perilous condition (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.3) and that then \softline
occurs again with specific reference to his lostness at the outset of the journey for the last time in \softline
the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.50).  It is also used in such a way as to remind us of his initial situation (see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.64, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.72, and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.24); in the last two of these scenes the protagonist is feeling \softline
pity for sinners, emotion that the poet fairly clearly considers inappropriate.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's promise that Beatrice (it can only be she) will lay bare to him the story \softline
of his life to come is not fulfilled, even though it is referred to again at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.88-90.  This \softline
role, so clearly reserved for Beatrice, is eventually given to Cacciaguida in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII.46-75.  \softline
The apparent contradiction has caused much consternation.  An ingenious solution has been \softline
proposed by Marguerite Mills Chiarenza ("Time and Eternity in the Myths of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Petrarch, Boccaccio: Studies in the Italian Trecento in Honor of Charles S. Singleton}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
ed. A. S. Bernardo and A. L. Pellegrini [Binghamton, NY: Medieval & Renaissance Texts and \softline
Studies, 1985], pp. 133-50): just as in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Helenus promises Aeneas that the Sibyl will \softline
reveal his future to him (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.458-460) only to have her instead lead him to Anchises, who \softline
performs that promised task (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.756-886), so in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  also the promised female \softline
'prophet' is replaced by a male.  In Chiarenza's view, the 'contradiction' is deliberate.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-136.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil now returns to his accustomed leftward direction in his guidance of \softline
Dante.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.132.\par
}}