{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 19}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\sect \sectd \sbknone\margrsxn1296\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-6.}{\plain \fs24   For Simon Magus see Singleton (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.1).  And for the intrinsic and \softline
striking distinction between the man named Simon, who was a }{\plain \fs24 \i magus}{\plain \fs24  (Acts 8:9), and the apostle \softline
Peter, also named Simon (}{\plain \fs24 \i Simon Petrus}{\plain \fs24  -- John 20:2, 20:6), see Singleton, "}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX: O Simon \softline
Mago!" }{\plain \fs24 \i Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24  80 (1965), pp. 92-99, as well as Ronald Herzman and William \softline
Stephany, "'O miseri seguaci': Sacramental Inversion in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  96 (1978), pp. \softline
40, 46.  Nicholas is seen as the follower of Simon Magus, while Dante presents himself as the \softline
follower of Simon Peter.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For studies of the canto as a whole see Kenelm Foster, "The Canto of the Damned Popes: \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  87 (1969), pp. 47-68, and the third chapter of Mark Musa, }{\plain \fs24 \i Advent at \softline
the Gates}{\plain \fs24  (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1974).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 16-21.}{\plain \fs24   Some have argued that this passage is not credible if taken literally and, therefore, \softline
must be understood as metaphorical.  See Leo Spitzer ("Two Dante Notes: I. An Autobiographical \softline
Incident in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX; II. Libicocco," }{\plain \fs24 \i Romanic Review}{\plain \fs24  34 [1943], pp. 248-62) and, more \softline
recently, Susan Noakes ("Dino Compagni and the Vow in San Giovanni: }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX, 16-21," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  86 [1968], pp. 41-63), who argues that the public vow of adherence to the French \softline
king taken, in the Baptistry and thus in proximity to the font, before Charles of Valois entered \softline
Florence in 1302, is what Dante now confesses he 'broke.'  The language of the passage is so \softline
concrete that it seems difficult to credit such an ingenious solution.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Mazzoni ("Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i battezzatori}{\plain \fs24  [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX, 16-21," English outline of an unpublished talk \softline
presented to the Dante Society of America on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the founding \softline
of the Society, Istituto Culturale Italiano, New York, 24 June1981]) affirms the literal meaning of \softline
the passage, while leaving in doubt the nature of the act that Dante claims to have performed.  \softline
Reviewing the commentary tradition, he supports the view of most of the early commentators that \softline
the noun }{\plain \fs24 \i battezzatori}{\plain \fs24  refers to the priests who performed baptismal rites.  Mirko Tavoni \softline
("Effrazione battesimale tra i simoniaci [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX 13-21]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Rivista di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24  10 (1992], \softline
pp. 457-512) gives reasons for believing that it refers to the fonts themselves.  That question is \softline
probably not resolvable, as the noun can have either meaning.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab All the early commentators take the incident referred to here as actually having occurred, \softline
when a child, playing with other children, became lodged in one of the smaller baptismal fonts of \softline
the Forentine baptistry.  Castelvetro (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 XIX.13-20) has perhaps the most believable \softline
explanation (even if he criticizes the author for including this detail, which, according to him, adds \softline
nothing to the poem): in his view the baptismal font and its several little }{\plain \fs24 \i pozzetti}{\plain \fs24  were protected by \softline
a thin wooden covering in order to protect the holy water from sight (and desacralizing \softline
droppings?).  It is }{\plain \fs24 \i this}{\plain \fs24  and not the marble of the font (which Benvenuto da Imola has Dante \softline
breaking with an axe brought to him by a bystander [comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.19-21]) that the poet \softline
broke, thus saving the near-drowned child.  His solemn oath, reminiscent of the language describing \softline
papal bulls and their seals (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XI.93, where Pope Innocent gave his approval to the founding \softline
of St. Francis's order, 'primo sigillo a sua relig{\f2 \'56}one' [the first seal of his order]), now stakes his \softline
authority as Florentine and poet on the charitable nature of his act, which others had apparently \softline
characterized as sacreligious.  Whatever explanation we find most acceptable, it seems clear that \softline
Dante is referring to an actual event that his former fellow-citizens would remember.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 22-24.}{\plain \fs24   We shall later learn that Dante here comes face to feet with a pope, Nicholas III \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.69-72).  The inverted figure, like Judas in the central mouth of Lucifer (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIV.63), \softline
has his head within, his legs without.  Dante's use of }{\plain \fs24 \i bocca}{\plain \fs24  (mouth) for the opening of the hole into \softline
which he descends suggests that eventually Nicholas will be eaten and digested by hell itself once \softline
the next simoniac pope comes to his eternal station.  For both these interpretations see Herzman \softline
and Stephany ("'O miseri seguaci': Sacramental Inversion in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  96 \softline
[1978]), pp. 59, 65.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 25.}{\plain \fs24   For the parodic inversion of Pentecostal fire in the punishment of sins that involve the \softline
perversion of the gift of the Holy Spirit, in particular as manifest in the misuse of extraordinary gifts \softline
of persuasion found among those punished as heresiarchs, sodomites, simoniacs, and false \softline
counsellors, see Reginald French ("Simony and Pentecost," }{\plain \fs24 \i Annual Report of the Dante Society}{\plain \fs24  82 \softline
[1964]), pp. 8-10.  A similar observation, if one limited to this scene, was made sixty years earlier \softline
by Carroll (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.22-30).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28-30.}{\plain \fs24   This sole 'classical' simile in a canto that favors the rhetorical device of authorial \softline
apostrophe (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.1, }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.10, }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.115) is muted in comparison with Dante's generally \softline
more developed similes of this type.  For the oil referred to here as indicative, parodically, of the \softline
anointing unction that priests offer those who suffer, see Herzman and Stephany ("'O miseri \softline
seguaci': Sacramental Inversion in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  96 [1978]), pp. 49-51.  Unction is \softline
usually associated with the head, not the feet; the ironic point is clear.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 35.}{\plain \fs24   The further bank of the }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24  is not as high as the nearer one because the slope of the \softline
Malebolge cuts away the topmost part of each successive pouch.  For this reason Virgil will lead \softline
Dante over the third }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24  to the fourth embankment only to climb down into the third from this \softline
vantage point.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 37-39.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's submissiveness to his lord, acknowledging Virgil's awareness of his wishes, \softline
is surely meant to contrast with Nicholas's rebellious offense to his.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 45.}{\plain \fs24   For the intriguing concept that the word }{\plain \fs24 \i zanca}{\plain \fs24  actually refers not to 'shanks' themselves \softline
but to their coverings, Roman military 'boots' that enclosed the calf and top of the foot, see Ernest \softline
Kaulbach, "}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX, 45: The 'Zanca' of Temporal Power," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  86 (1968), pp. 127-35.  He argues that, since in the late thirteenth century no one in Rome but the Prefect of the city \softline
was allowed to wear }{\plain \fs24 \i zanche}{\plain \fs24  within the confines of the city (thus reflecting their significance for \softline
temporal, and not spiritual, authority), the fact that Dante's pope wears them is indicative precisely \softline
of papal assertion of temporal power.  The pope is thus punished for this sin along with simony.  \softline
Kaulbach's argument is strengthened by the reference to the Donation of Constantine in this canto \softline
(see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.115-117).  It is, however, weakened by the fact that Satan's legs (or \softline
Virgil's -- the point is debated) are also referred to as }{\plain \fs24 \i zanche}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIV.79 and the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXXIV.79).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-47.}{\plain \fs24   The pope's situation is reminiscent of St. Peter's upside-down crucifixion (see \softline
Herzman and Stephany, "'O miseri seguaci': Sacramental Inversion in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  \softline
96 [1978], p. 44), but also refers to the Florentine mode of dispatching convicted assassins, 
'planting' them upside down in a hole and then suffocating them when the hole is filled back up with \softline
earth: 'Let the assassin be planted upside down, so that he may be put to death.'  Perhaps the \softline
earliest commentator to make reference to this 'ancient decree' of Florence is Rossetti (comm. to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.46-51).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 48.}{\plain \fs24   Musa (}{\plain \fs24 \i Advent at the Gates}{\plain \fs24  [Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1974], p. 46), \softline
draws the reader's attention to popularizing phrases that exist only in the negative, e.g., the English \softline
'he didn't say beans,' paralleled in the Italian phrase 'e non fa motto' (he doesn't say a word), used of \softline
Brutus in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIV.66).   Musa's point is that Dante here uses a phrase that we expect to hear \softline
only in the negative to telling sarcastic effect: this is a strikingly insulting way to address a pope.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 49-51.}{\plain \fs24   Dante now assumes the role of confessing friar.  The last verse of the tercet has \softline
caused controversy.  Most of the early commentators think the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i cessare}{\plain \fs24  is used intransitively; \softline
most later ones disagree, believing it is used transitively (as it is at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVII.33).  But almost all \softline
agree on the basic meaning: the assassin calls back the friar in order to delay his death a while.  \softline
Pagliaro (}{\plain \fs24 \i Ulisse}{\plain \fs24 : }{\plain \fs24 \i ricerche semantiche sulla "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Messina-Florence: D'Anna, \softline
1967], pp. 263-69, opts for a strikingly different solution, one that has had some success among \softline
recent commentators.  Since }{\plain \fs24 \i cessare}{\plain \fs24 , used transitively, ordinarily in Dante means 'to avoid,' it does \softline
so here as well.  The assassin calls the priest back in order to confess, not his own crimes, but those \softline
of his master in crime, thereby gaining his freedom.  The solution is attractive because it avoids the \softline
somewhat unusual use of 'cessare' to mean 'put off, delay' instead of 'avoid, escape from.'  \softline
However, the context, in which nothing the sinner can say will sway either Dante or God, works \softline
against it.  Further, had Dante wanted to make the analogy work, he would have had Nicholas \softline
'betray' someone else, one who had led him into his crimes.  Instead, he admits his own addiction to \softline
simony, and then points to others who will practice it }{\plain \fs24 \i after}{\plain \fs24  him.  If these nine verses (79-87) are, as \softline
many believe, a later addition (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.79-87), it is conceivable that Dante's first \softline
version of Nicholas's speech might have concluded with just such a betrayal.  In that case, many \softline
who remain unconvinced might embrace Pagliaro's thesis.  In our translation we have tried to \softline
hedge, using 'stay' in such a way as to allow it to be interpreted either as 'put off (for a while)' or \softline
'put a stop to.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For a new hypothesis, one put forward in the attempt to break through to a new solution, \softline
see Luca Serianni ("Un paragone dantesco: }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 , XIX, 49-51," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Omaggio a Gianfranco \softline
Folena}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Pier Vincenzo Mengaldo [Padua: Editoriale Programma, 1993], pp. 473-76), arguing \softline
for the view that the assasin calls back the friar in order to save, not his earthly life, but his soul.  \softline
Since this is what those damned in hell may be understood not to have done at their last moment, it \softline
seems less than a convincing explanation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 52-53.}{\plain \fs24   The first naming of Pope Boniface VIII (Benedetto Caetani) in the poem.  \softline
Succeeding Celestine V in January of 1295 and dying in October of 1303, he greatly strengthened \softline
the power of the papacy, while also asserting its temporal power in the realm Dante allowed to \softline
Empire alone.  His support of the Black Guelphs and the French forces in Florence earned him \softline
Dante's unflagging enmity.  Nicholas's taking Dante for Boniface is grimly yet hilariously amusing.  \softline
His doubled phrasing will be echoed in Virgil's instructions to Dante a few lines later (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.61-62).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 54.}{\plain \fs24   Some have suggested that the condition of future knowledge alluded to by Farinata \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X.100-108) pertains only to the heretics; this passage would seem to indicate clearly that \softline
others, as well, and perhaps all those in hell, have some sense of the future but none of the present.  \softline
Nicholas had 'read' in the 'book of the future' that Boniface would be on his way to hell as of 1303, \softline
and is thus now confused, as he expects no one else to pile in on top of him but Boniface.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 57.}{\plain \fs24   The beautiful Lady is, resolved from metaphor, the Church, Christ's 'bride.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 69-72.}{\plain \fs24   Pope Nicholas III (Giovanni Gaetano Orsini) served from 1277-1280, openly \softline
practicing nepotism in favor of his relations.  His references to the 'she-bear' and her 'cubs' reflect \softline
his family name, Orsini (}{\plain \fs24 \i orsa}{\plain \fs24  means 'bear' in Italian), one of the most powerful of Roman families.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 79-87.}{\plain \fs24   Clement is compared to Jason, brother of the high priest Onias.  From the king of \softline
Syria, Antiochus IV Epiphanes, he bought his brother's position and then brought pagan practices \softline
to Jerusalem (see II Maccabees 4:7-26).  In short, to Dante he seemed a Jewish 'simoniac pope,' \softline
prefiguring the corrupt practices of Clement.  Dante condemns, as Durling points out (}{\plain \fs24 \i The "Divine \softline
Comedy" of Dante Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 , Notes by R. M. Durling and Ronald Martinez [New York and \softline
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996], p. 300), a number of Clement's actions, including 'his role \softline
in Philip's destruction of the Templars (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24  XX.91-93); the removal of the papal see to Avignon \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24  XXXII.157-160); his simony (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XVII.82); and his betrayal of Henry VII (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XXX.142-148).'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab This is perhaps the crucial passage for those who debate the internal dating of the \softline
composition of the poem.  First, one should explain its literal meaning.  Nicholas has now been \softline
'cooking' for twenty years (1280-1300).  The Frenchman Bertrand de Got, who served as Pope \softline
Clement V from 1305-1314 and who supervised the papacy's removal to Avignon, an act that \softline
caused much Italian outrage (and notably Dante's [see }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24  XXXII.157-160; }{\plain \fs24 \i Epistle}{\plain \fs24  XI.21-26]), \softline
will replace Boniface as topmost simoniac pope before Boniface spends twenty years in that \softline
position of punishment, i.e., before 1323.  If the first }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24  was composed, as many, but not all, \softline
propose, between 1306-07 and 1309-10, Dante here is either making a rough (and chancey) \softline
prediction that Clement, who suffered from ill health, would die sometime before 1323, or he is \softline
knowingly referring to the death of Clement in 1314.  However, most, observing Dante's general \softline
practice in 'predicting' only things actually known to him, argue that this is a prophecy }{\plain \fs24 \i post \softline
eventum}{\plain \fs24 , i.e., that the passage was written after April of 1314, when Clement died.  If that is true, \softline
then either the traditional dating of the poem's composition is incorrect, and it was written later \softline
(and much more quickly) than is generally believed (ca. 1313-1321), or Dante inserted this passage \softline
while he was revising }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  in 1315 before circulating it.  This is Petrocchi's solution (}{\plain \fs24 \i Itinerari \softline
danteschi}{\plain \fs24  [Milan: Franco Angeli, 1994}{\plain \fs24 \super 2}{\plain \fs24  (Bari: Laterza, 1969)]) and many follow it.  For an \softline
opposing view, see Padoan (}{\plain \fs24 \i Il lungo cammino del "Poema sacro": studi danteschi}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: \softline
Olschki, 1993]).  And for a summary of the question and bibliography see A. E. Quaglio, \softline
'Commedia, Composizione' (ED.1970.2), pp. 81-82.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab That this is the only reference to Clement before well into }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  lends support to the \softline
idea that this passage is a later interpolation.  In a paper written in 1999 Stefano Giannini, a \softline
graduate student at Johns Hopkins University, examined all the references to events occurring after \softline
1300 in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  ("Post-1300 Time-References in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," unpublished paper prepared at \softline
Johns Hopkins 7 June 1999).  His provisional results are as follows: 22 references to events 
occurring between 1300 and 1304; 4 references to events occurring between 1306 and 1309 (all \softline
between Cantos XXVI and XXIX); this sole reference to an event occurring in 1314.  These results \softline
would certainly seem to support those who maintain that this passage is a later interpolation and \softline
that }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  was essentially completed during the first decade of the fourteenth century.  For a \softline
different point of view, see Michelangelo Picone ("Avignone come tema letterario: Dante e \softline
Petrarca," }{\plain \fs24 \i L{\u8219\'27}Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  20 [2002]), pp. 7-8; he argues that the prophetic gesture here (unlike that in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXII.148-153, which clearly refers to the 'Avignonian captivity'), offers no sense of the \softline
removal of the papacy to Avignon, and thus represents a moment of genuine prophecy on Dante{\u8219\'27}s \softline
part, since it therefore must have been written before 1309.  This interesting point may be \softline
countered by the argument that, revising his text after 1314, Dante did not need to refer to the \softline
infamous transfer of the papal seat, familiar to all in Europe.  Furthermore, his phrase describing \softline
Clement{\u8219\'27}s outdoing of even Boniface in evil, as one 'di pi{\f2 \'6a} laida opra' (one even fouler in his deeds--verse 82) certainly may have been intended to refer to nothing more than or other than Clement{\u8219\'27}s \softline
worst deed of all, the 'abduction' of the papacy to France.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 88-89.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's coyness here is palpable: of course he is not being 'too bold' (}{\plain \fs24 \i troppo folle}{\plain \fs24 ) in \softline
the eyes of any just observer.  At the same time he is clearly aware of the enormity of his 'singing' \softline
such a 'tune' to a pope.  Some attempt to forge a relationship here between Dante and Ulysses.  \softline
E.g., Barolini, who refers to the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i folle}{\plain \fs24  as a 'Ulyssean word' (}{\plain \fs24 \i The Undivine "Comedy": \softline
Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992], p. 79); Durling (}{\plain \fs24 \i The "Divine \softline
Comedy" of Dante Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 , Notes by R. M. Durling and Ronald Martinez [New York and \softline
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996], p. 300), who claims that this adjective is used elsewhere in \softline
the poem only to refer to 'the possible rashness of the voyage of the pilgrim and the journey of \softline
Ulysses.'  The adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i folle}{\plain \fs24  is used fourteen times in all in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24 , three times to refer to \softline
Dante, twice to Ulysses, and nine times to the rashness of others, as a search on 'foll?' in the DDP \softline
will quickly demonstrate.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 90-117.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's great outburst of invective against Nicholas (and all simoniac popes) is \softline
based on the history of the Church, beginning with Christ's calling of Peter, moving to Peter's and \softline
the other apostles' choosing Matthias by lot to take the place of Judas.  After Dante alludes to \softline
Nicholas's vile maneuvering against the Angevin king, Charles I of Sicily, he returns to the Bible, \softline
now to Revelation (for discussion see V. Stanley Benfell, "Prophetic Madness: The Bible in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  \softline
XIX," }{\plain \fs24 \i Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24  110 [1995], pp. 145-63), interpreted positively as the presentation \softline
of the Roman Church as keeper of the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit and the Ten Commandments.  \softline
(For the relationship between the woman here [Rome as honest wife of the Caesars, free of papal \softline
constraint] and the whore of }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  XXXII [Rome as the corrupted Church after the Donation \softline
of Constantine] see Charles Davis ["Canto XIX: Simoniacs," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis: {\u8220\'93}Inferno{\u8221\'94}}{\plain \fs24 , ed. A. \softline
Mandelbaum, A. Oldcorn, C. Ross (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998)], p. 271.)  \softline
Dante's oration ends with a final slam at papal worship of 'the golden calf,' joining the final \softline
apostrophe of the canto, addressed to Constantine as the source of most of Christianity's troubles \softline
when he granted the papacy temporal authority.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 115-117.}{\plain \fs24   The author's apostrophe of the emperor Constantine (reigned 306-337) holds him \softline
responsible for the so-called 'Donation of Constantine,' by which he granted temporal sovereignty \softline
to Pope Sylvester I (314-335) -- and his successors -- over Italy and the rest of the western empire.  
This document was considered genuine until Lorenzo Valla, in the fifteenth century, demonstrated \softline
that it was a forgery.  For Dante it was genuine and a cause for excited concern.  (His views on the \softline
subject are exposited forcefully in the later }{\plain \fs24 \i Monarchia}{\plain \fs24  [III.x.1-9]).  In his view the emperor was \softline
not empowered to give over his authority; thus the document was truthful, but its legitimacy \softline
compromised.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab We are perhaps meant to understand by these lines that Sylvester, who cured Constantine of \softline
leprosy and was, as a result, rewarded by him with authority over the Roman empire, is the bottom-most pope in this hole, the 'first rich Father,' a condition that was to his immediate benefit but to the \softline
eventual loss of all Christians.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 118-123.}{\plain \fs24   These two tercets are dedicated to Dante's audiences' very different reaction to \softline
his outburst, Nicholas's displeasure at these words (the }{\plain \fs24 \i note}{\plain \fs24  [notes] of v. 118 recall the same word \softline
used at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XVI.126-127: 'le note / di questa comed{\f2 \'58}a' [the strains of this Comedy]) and Virgil's \softline
contentment with his pupil.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 124-126.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's pleasure in Dante is indeed so great that he embraces him and carries him \softline
back out of the }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 128-130.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil sets Dante down upon the bridge that overlooks the fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24 , in \softline
which, in the next canto, Dante will observe the diviners.\par
}}