{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 14}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-6.}{\plain \fs24   The first tercet concludes the action of the preceding canto.  This is a particularly \softline
egregious example of the way in which Dante deliberately avoids keeping his canto borders 'neat' \softline
(see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIII.1-3).  The following tercet, on the other hand, would have made a \softline
'proper' beginning to the fourteenth canto, marking, as it does, the border between the second ring \softline
of the seventh Circle (violence against others) and the third (violence against God).  Here we shall \softline
witness (as indeed we have done before) the dreadful 'art' of God in carrying out His just revenge \softline
upon sinners, in this case those who sinned directly against Him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 7-13.}{\plain \fs24   The hellscape, featuring impoverished 'vegetation' in the last canto, now is as barren \softline
as it can possibly be: nothing can take root in this sand.  The retrospective glance reminds us of \softline
where we have been in this Circle: Phlegethon, circling the wood, the wood in turn circling the \softline
sand (violence against others, against selves, and now against God).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The translation of verse 7, which uses the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i nove}{\plain \fs24  either to mean 'new' or 'strange,' \softline
or perhaps both at once, attempts to represent this ambiguity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 14-15.}{\plain \fs24   That Dante should refer here to Cato the Elder, who committed suicide at Utica \softline
(when further opposition to the republican forces led by him against Julius Caesar's army seemed \softline
futile) seems to invite a negative judgment on him.  Cato, however, will be presented in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  I and II, in an authorial decision that still baffles commentators, as one of the saved.  \softline
To refer to him here, a few verses from the wood of the suicides -- where Christian readers might \softline
normally assume that Cato should be punished -- given Dante's plan eventually to reveal his \softline
salvation, was a chancey choice for him to have made.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The poet is translating a line from Lucan's }{\plain \fs24 \i Pharsalia}{\plain \fs24  describing Cato's heroic decision to \softline
lead the remnant of dead Pompey's republican forces across the barren sands of Lybia in an \softline
attempt to escape from Caesar, and to do so, not carried by slaves, as Roman generals were wont \softline
to be transported, but on foot himself: 'primusque gradus in pulvere ponam' (and I, first among \softline
them, shall set my feet upon the sand [}{\plain \fs24 \i Phars}{\plain \fs24 . IX.395 -- the citation was perhaps first noted by \softline
Daniello, comm. to XIV.13-15]).  For a treatment of Cato in the context of canto XIV, see \softline
Giuseppe Mazzotta, }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante, Poet of the Desert}{\plain \fs24  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979), pp. \softline
47-65.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Dante thus reads Cato's suicide as something other, an act resembling Christ's sacrifice of \softline
Himself so that others may be free (for discussion see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i Allegory in Dante{\u8219\'27}s \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969], pp. 123-31).  Now such a view may \softline
seem blasphemous (a fitting thought when we turn back, from the opening cantos of }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 , \softline
to this passage in the canto of blasphemy), and has caused extraordinary exertion on the part of \softline
commentators to 'allegorize' the saved Cato we find in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  and turn him into an abstract \softline
quality rather than an historical being.  Dante's text will not permit us such luxury of avoidance.  \softline
His Cato, a Christian through a process that no one can understand, is saved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 16-18.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's apostrophe of God's avenging spirit seems particularly apt in a canto \softline
dedicated to the punishment of those who directly opposed Him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-27.}{\plain \fs24   This passage is opaque to a first-time reader.  Only in retrospect are we able with 
precision to realize which sinners are alluded to by which postures: those lying supine, the fewest \softline
in number, are the blasphemers (and they, because they cursed God, now cry out the loudest); the \softline
most numerous class of sinners, moving about incessantly, are the homosexuals, who sinned \softline
against nature (canto XV); the sinners who are hunched up are the usurers, who sinned againt \softline
God's 'grandchild,' art, or industry (canto XVI).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28.}{\plain \fs24   The flakes of fire showering down on all those who were violent against God seem \softline
most directly derived from the brimstone and fire rained down upon the inhabitants of Sodom and \softline
Gomorrah for their allowance of the practice of homosexuality (Genesis19:24), as was perhaps \softline
first observed by Vellutello (comm. to XIV.28-30).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 30.}{\plain \fs24   A clear reference to a line in a sonnet by Guido Cavalcanti, 'Bilt{\f2 \'42} di donna' (A lady's \softline
loveliness), in which, describing things beautiful to behold, he refers to 'white snow falling on a \softline
windless day' (}{\plain \fs24 \i e bianca neve scender senza venti}{\plain \fs24 ).  While the citation seems certain, it was \softline
perhaps only observed by a commentator for the first time in 1905 (by Torraca, comm. to \softline
XIV.30), indicating a phenomenon worthy of note: early commentators rarely if ever have read \softline
(or, if they have, pay attention to) Dante's vernacular poetic precursors as sources for his verse.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 31-36.}{\plain \fs24   The reference is to an incident related in a letter (falsely) attributed to Alexander \softline
the Great, writing to his tutor, Aristotle, from his campaign in India.  Dante found the text in \softline
Albertus Magnus (}{\plain \fs24 \i Meteor}{\plain \fs24 . I.iv.8), a work to which he adverts fairly frequently (see, e.g., the note \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XII.4-10).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 40.}{\plain \fs24   Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to XIV.40-42) explains that the 'tresca' is a Neapolitan \softline
dance in which a leader touches one part of his or her body with a hand, a gesture imitated by all \softline
the other dancers; then, rapidly, the leader touches another part, then another, sometimes using \softline
one, sometimes two, hands, each gesture, acclerated in time, being similarly imitated by the rest.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 43-45.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's preface to his question about the identity of the noteworthy personage \softline
before them might be compared to the unnecessarily flippant question posed by a student to a \softline
teacher who had been caught out in an earlier mistake.  There seems to be no other reason for \softline
Dante to remind Virgil of his failure to enter the walls of Dis (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VIII.115-117).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-48.}{\plain \fs24   Like Farinata, Capaneus (we learn his name from Virgil at XIV.63) is a figure of \softline
some greatness (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X.73, where Farinata is }{\plain \fs24 \i magnanimo}{\plain \fs24  [great of soul] -- and see Statius, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Thebaid}{\plain \fs24  XI.1, where Capaneus is referred to as }{\plain \fs24 \i magnanimus}{\plain \fs24 ); like Farinata, he seems not to be \softline
bothered by the pains of hell (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X.36).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The last verb in the tercet is a matter of debate.  As always, in our translation we follow \softline
Petrocchi, even when we disagree with him.  His reading is }{\plain \fs24 \i marturi}{\plain \fs24 , or 'torture'; others prefer the \softline
traditional reading, }{\plain \fs24 \i maturi}{\plain \fs24 , 'ripen' or 'soften,' a view with which we concur.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 49-50.}{\plain \fs24   Capaneus, though undergoing the pain inflicted by the burning flakes, is alert \softline
enough to overhear the two strangers discussing him.  Surely his Stoic reserve creates an initial \softline
positive impression on the reader.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 51-60.}{\plain \fs24   Capaneus was one of the seven kings who besieged Thebes in aid of Polynices, the \softline
son of Oedipus whose twin brother, Eteocles, refused to allow him his turn at ruling.  The \softline
narrative of the death of Capaneus on the walls of Thebes and his boast against Jupiter are drawn \softline
from Statius, }{\plain \fs24 \i Thebaid}{\plain \fs24  X.883-939.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab As his oratorical flourish begins, the listener tends to admire the courage of his speech.  As \softline
it continues, it more and more resembles vainglorious boasting.  Capaneus may play the role of a \softline
stock character in Roman comedy, the }{\plain \fs24 \i miles gloriosus}{\plain \fs24 , or braggart soldier.  (For Dante's probable \softline
awarness of this term see at least Cicero, }{\plain \fs24 \i De amicitia}{\plain \fs24  XXVI.98, a passage that almost certainly \softline
lies behind the depiction of the flatteries of Tha{\f2 \'56}s at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVIII.133-135.)  When we study his \softline
words we find some disquieting elements in them: alive he was a defamer of the gods, as he is \softline
now; he says that Jupiter will not have his revenge against him even if he sends Vulcan in his forge \softline
in Mt. Etna into mass production of lightning bolts (as was necessary to quell the insurrection of \softline
the giants at the battle of Phlegra [see the further reference at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXI.95]).  We may reflect \softline
that, in the first place, Jupiter (or indeed the true God he would have blasphemed had he known \softline
Him) already }{\plain \fs24 \i has}{\plain \fs24  his vengeance (one look at supine Capaneus confirms this); in the second, when \softline
Jupiter took his revenge at Thebes, it took him but a single bolt to dispatch Capaneus (and Statius \softline
says that he was lucky not to live long enough for the second).  In short, Capaneus, in his \softline
egregious over-confidence, makes something of a fool of himself (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXV.15 for \softline
confirmation of his prideful opposition to God).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 61-66.}{\plain \fs24   The vehemence of Virgil's outburst against Capaneus, underlined as being his most \softline
heated condemnation of a sinner yet (and no other will exceed it), is difficult to explain.  A \softline
student, Edward Sherline (Princeton '82) some years ago suggested that Virgil, already angered \softline
by Dante's wry reminder of his previous insufficiency before the walls of Dis (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIV.43-45), is \softline
now having }{\plain \fs24 \i his}{\plain \fs24  revenge on Capaneus, a revenge especially pleasing when Virgil considered what \softline
Capaneus was quite effective doing and what he himself had utterly failed to do: besting the \softline
defenders of the walls of a hostile city (mere victory of that kind was not enough for Capaneus, \softline
who challenged Jupiter himself to combat).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 69-70.}{\plain \fs24   Some readers have objected that blasphemy against Jupiter should be welcomed in \softline
a Christian dispensation, not punished.  Dante's point is clearly that Capaneus meant to oppose the \softline
very principle of divine power, no matter what its name.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 76-84.}{\plain \fs24   The little stream that the travelers now see is the second (and last) body of water \softline
that moves across their usual circular path and downward (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VII.100-108, where the \softline
descent from the fourth to the fifth Circle is made alongside a little stream that seems to connect \softline
Acheron to Styx).  All other gatherings of water have been circles that they had eventually to \softline
cross in order to descend.  We will soon be able to understand (vv. 115-117) that this particular \softline
stream contains waters from Phlegethon that will eventually fall into the frozen Cocytus (heard \softline
tumbling down to the eighth Circle at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVI.1-2).  Dante and Virgil apparently do not happen \softline
to see the stream that connects Styx to Phlegethon because, as Virgil suggests (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIV.128-129), their path does not include full circles in a given zone (e.g., their passage along Phlegethon, \softline
which covers exactly a semicircle, in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XII).  For a lengthy and helpful review of the 'hydraulic \softline
system' of hell -- which nonetheless remains difficult to understand -- see Singleton's comm. to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIV.121-138.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab The Bulicame is a hot spring near Viterbo from which prostitutes, perhaps not allowed to \softline
frequent the public baths, made conduits from the source to service their own dwellings.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The passage to the next and deeper zone of the burning sand now lies right before them (it \softline
is a necessary expedient, we want to remember, to get Dante across the burning sand); before \softline
they can follow it, Virgil will take up the subject of the waters of hell.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 94-111.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's presentation of the rivers of hell pauses first to create an etiological myth \softline
that explains their source.  It has two parts, a history of Crete and a description of the statue of an \softline
old man that stands inside Mount Ida.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 94-102.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's first words rely on the passage in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  (III.104-106) describing \softline
Crete, similarly located 'in the middle of the sea' (}{\plain \fs24 \i medio}{\plain \fs24 ... }{\plain \fs24 \i ponto}{\plain \fs24 ).  It was once 'chaste' when it \softline
enjoyed a 'golden age' under Saturn (see Amilacare Iannucci, "The Gospel of Nicodemus in \softline
Medieval Italian Literature," }{\plain \fs24 \i Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24  14 [1992], pp. 191-220). for Dante's almost \softline
entirely positive treatment of Saturn).  But now its mountain, Ida, the site of a sort of classical \softline
'Eden,' rich in water and vegetation, is a waste land; like Eden, it, too, is deserted.  Rhea, Saturn's \softline
wife, chose it as the cradle for her son, Jupiter.  But now 'original sin' seems to have crept into the \softline
Golden Age: the crying child needs to be protected (in the original myth, of course, from Saturn \softline
himself, who had the unpleasant habit of eating his children so as not to be dethroned by one of \softline
them).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab That is all we are told.  On Crete there was once a Golden Age, but something went awry.  \softline
Mazzotta (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante, Poet of the Desert}{\plain \fs24  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979]), p. 29, points \softline
out that both Aeneas (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . III.104-191) and Paul (Acts 27:7-13) have difficulties in continuing \softline
their missions at Crete, which may account for some of the negative feelings that accrue to Crete \softline
in this passage.  Many commentators refer to the parallel with the similar narrative found in Ovid \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . I.89-150), the descent from an age of gold, to one of silver, to one of bronze, and finally \softline
to one of iron, when Astraea, justice, is the last of the gods to leave the earth.\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 103-111.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's second myth is more of his own devising.  While the statue of the old \softline
man is closely modelled on that found in Nebuchadnezzar's dream (Daniel 2:31-35), the poet's \softline
enclosure of the statue in Ida seems to be essentially his own invention (although commentators \softline
suggest the influence of Pliny's account of a body 46 cubits tall, discovered after an earthquake, \softline
inside Ida -- see (}{\plain \fs24 \i Nat. Hist}{\plain \fs24 . VII.xvi.73).  But there are 'hydraulic' reasons for putting him and his \softline
tears (these are not found in Daniel) there: Dante needs to account for the origin of the rivers of \softline
hell.  The }{\plain \fs24 \i gran veglio}{\plain \fs24 , within the mountain, turns his back on Egypt (Damietta, a city in the Nile \softline
delta) and gazes on Rome as though it were his mirror.  Interpretations of this detail vary, but it \softline
would seem that the movement of temporal rule from the East to Rome would account for this \softline
representative of the original political order looking toward its new home.  What does he see \softline
there?  Probably, in Dante's view, his mirror image, since the Empire is totally ineffective.  He is \softline
putting more weight upon his right foot, formed of baked clay, which most of the early \softline
commentators thought represented the corrupt Church; yet an argument can be made that, since \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i veglio}{\plain \fs24  is a figuration of pagan man, the Church would be inappropriately a part of his \softline
'physique.'  In Nebuchadnezzar's dream a rock destroys the feet of the statue; for Christian \softline
exegetes this rock represents Christ, destroying the Old Man and making the new life possible for \softline
mankind.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 112-114.}{\plain \fs24   The waters that collect from all the non-golden and riven parts of the statue \softline
gather somewhere beneath it under Mount Ida and force their way into the underworld.  For the \softline
root of the image of the rivers of hell as tears from the }{\plain \fs24 \i Veglio}{\plain \fs24 's eyes in the redeeming blood of \softline
Christ on the Cross, flowing into Limbo to redeem Adam, see H. Theodore Silverstein ("The \softline
Weeping Statue and Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Gran Veglio}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Harvard Studies and Notes in Philology and \softline
Literature}{\plain \fs24  13 [1931], pp. 165-84) and Anthony Cassell (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante's Fearful Art of Justice}{\plain \fs24  [Toronto: \softline
University of Toronto Press, 1984]), pp. 58-60.  The Old Man is, in this reading, the parodic \softline
anticipation of the New Man, the Son of God.  As such, he is at once the representation of \softline
obdurate denial of the true God and the image of the blaspheming, idolatrous counter-religion that \softline
would stand in the place of the true faith.  This interpretation, unifying the two major figures of \softline
the canto, the Old Man and Capaneus, by seeing the former, too, as representing blasphemy, is \softline
Cassell's, pp. 57-65, with bibliography on the question, pp. 140-41.  Not all will accept this \softline
reading.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 115-129.}{\plain \fs24   And now Virgil can get to his putative main point, the disposition of the rivers \softline
of hell.  Dante's question in response seems to reveal that he has forgotten what he has seen at the \softline
border of Avarice and Wrath (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VII.100-108).  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIV.76-84, above.  On \softline
the other hand, Virgil does not make that plain to him.  As a result, whether that stream is \softline
supposed to be from the same source as this one -- the most attractive hypothesis -- becomes, at \softline
best, moot.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 130-138.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's two questions are meant as an aid to the reader, who may not have \softline
realized that the river of blood and what has just now been called 'Phlegethon' for the first time (at \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIV.116) are one and the same.  As for Lethe, since it is thought of as being a major fluvial \softline
appurtenance of the afterworld, the poet wants to reassure his reader that it has not been \softline
forgotten in the watery arrangment of hell but awaits discovery in purgatory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 139-142.}{\plain \fs24   The coda ties the action back to where it stopped (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIV.84).  The next \softline
canto, in fact, will pick up precisely from there (and not here), as though it were the last verse of \softline
the canto.\par
}}