{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 11}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stipa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ({\u8216\'91}throng{\u8217\'92} -- from the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stipare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stivare}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in Dante (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.19; \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.82) seems to refer to animals or people crowded together as in a pen or in the hold of \softline
a ship (cf. the English {\u8216\'91}steerage{\u8217\'92}).  Here the term refers to those crowded together in the more \softline
restricted area of the narrowing lower three circles of hell, i.e., the subject of Virgil{\u8217\'92}s discourse \softline
throughout this canto, the shortest (along with }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI, which also has but 115 lines) of the poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 5.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The stench of the sins of Circles 7-9 is greater than any the travelers have heretofore \softline
experienced.  For notice of the stench of sin in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Visio Pauli}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Francesco Mazzoni,  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Canto XI \softline
dell{\u8217\'92}{\u8221\'94}Inferno{\u8221\'94}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Neapolitana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), dir. P. Giannantonio (Naples: Loffredo, 1985),  pp. \softline
7-8, citing Theodire Silverstein ({\u8220\'93}Dante and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Visio Pauli}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  47 [1932], \softline
pp 392-98).  And see Virgil, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.201, where the doves of Venus avoid the jaws of stinking \softline
Avernus ({\u8216\'91}olentis Averni{\u8217\'92}), a passage perhaps first noted by Pietro di Dante (Pietro2, comm. to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.4-5).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This lid of a second funereal monument is similarly not fully described.  See the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.8-9.  Are these lids suspended in air or do they rest on the ground, tilted against the side of \softline
the tombs?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante may have confused Pope Anastasius II (496-98) with the emperor Anastasius I \softline
(491-518).  In the commentaries there is also a question as to whether Dante{\u8217\'92}s Photinus was a \softline
deacon of Thessalonica or the bishop of Sirmium.  Further, the grammatical structure of the \softline
passage would allow us to understand either that Photinus misled Anastasius into heresy or was \softline
himself thus misled by the pope.  A passage in Isidore of Seville, if it happens to be Dante{\u8217\'92}s direct \softline
or indirect source, resolves two of these three issues.  Isidore is speaking of the various kinds of \softline
heresy: {\u8216\'91}Photiniani a Photino Gallograeciae Sirmiae episcopo noncupati, qui Ebionitarum \softline
haeresim suscitans adseruit Christum a Maria per Ioseph nuptiali coitu fuisse conceptum{\u8217\'92} (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etym}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VIII.v.37).  Thus, according to him, the Photinians are named after Photinus the bishop of \softline
Sirmium, who followed the Ebionite heresy (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etym}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.5.36) in promulgating the notion that \softline
Jesus was born from the natural union of Joseph and Mary.  And thus it was Photinus who misled \softline
the pope, since this very heresy is named after him.  For an English gloss to this passage see \softline
Singleton (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.8-9).  The more usual view in the commentary tradition is that the \softline
Photinus in question was the deacon of Thessalonica, a follower of Acacius, but this is probably \softline
not the better interpretation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante, as though speaking through Virgil to his reader, would seem to be \softline
admitting that this canto is not nearly as exciting as those that have gone before (and those that \softline
will come after), since it involves nothing but pedantic lecturing.  In his little joke the excuse for \softline
his reader-unfriendly behavior is that the protagonist{\u8217\'92}s olfactory powers required a rest so that \softline
they might become accustomed to the stench of lower hell.  No experiential learning being \softline
possible, the class had to retire to the schoolroom.  Virgil{\u8217\'92}s discourse is thus presented as little \softline
more than filler -- even if the reader realizes that the canto has no lesser purpose than that of \softline
establishing a system for the organization of the sins of humankind.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the notion that the number of this canto functions as a numerological indicator see 
Victoria Kirkham ("Eleven Is for Evil: Measured Trespass in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegorica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 \softline
[1989]), pp. 38-39.  She argues for this interpretation on the basis of the argument first advanced \softline
by Augustine (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De civ. Dei}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.20) -- and then by other fathers of the Church -- that eleven is a \softline
number meant to be understood as being in excess of the Decalogue, i.e., that it represents \softline
transgression because it {\u8219\'27}exceeds{\u8219\'27} the Law.  Thus canto XI, by offering a comprehensive listing of \softline
all the sins punished in Inferno, is marked as a place dedicated to the display of evil.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 17.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Again the text insists that its sole concern is the nature of the three Circles beneath the \softline
sixth, that is, the rest of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , cantos XII-XXXIV.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Perhaps the key passage for our understanding of the organization of lower hell.  \softline
All sins punished therein are sins of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 malizia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , {\u8216\'91}malice,{\u8217\'92} in the sense that these sinners all willfully \softline
desire to do harm (the incontinent may indeed end up doing harm to others or to themselves, but \softline
their desire is for another kind of gratification altogether).  Heresy, because it lies within the iron \softline
walls of Dis, and is thus also punished as a sin of the will rather than of the appetite (surely it \softline
seems closer to malice than to appetite), is perhaps less readily considered a desire to harm others \softline
(even though it assuredly, to Dante{\u8217\'92}s mind, does so).  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ingiuria}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has thus both its Latin meaning, \softline
injustice, acting in opposition to the law (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 iniuria}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), and its other meaning, the doing of harm.  As \softline
Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Canto XI dell{\u8217\'92}{\u8221\'94}Inferno{\u8221\'94}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Neapolitana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ], dir. P. Giannantonio [Naples: \softline
Loffredo, 1985], p. 14) points out, Daniello (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.22-24) was the first commentator \softline
explicitly to link this passage with its almost certain source in Cicero (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De officiis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.xiii.41): {\u8216\'91}Cum \softline
autem duobus modis, id est aut vi aut fraude, fiat iniuria; fraus quasi vulpeculae, vis leonis videtur; \softline
utrumque alienissimum ab homine est, sed fraus odio digna maiore.{\u8217\'92}  (Mazzoni notes that Dante \softline
had already cited this text in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.xi.10-11, where {\u8216\'91}aut vi aut fraude{\u8217\'92} is translated {\u8216\'91}per forza o \softline
per fraude.{\u8217\'92}) Marc Cogan{\u8217\'92}s monograph (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Design in the Wax: The Structure of the {\u8220\'93}Divine \softline
Comedy{\u8221\'94} and Its Meaning}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1999]) attempts to \softline
revise our understanding of the organizing principles of Dante{\u8217\'92}s structure of the vices, claiming \softline
that they are essentially only Aristotelian (the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nicomachean Ethics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as explained by St. Thomas).  \softline
Cogan disregards the importance of Cicero in this respect entirely (although this passage is \softline
mentioned once in a note).  This omission may help explain how Cogan could have decided that \softline
the sins of the seventh Circle are not sins of the will, but of irascible appetite (pp. 24-36), an \softline
interpretation that almost certainly cannot be accepted.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Here malice is divided into two sub-groups, force (violence) and fraud.  Fraud itself will \softline
shortly be divided into two sub-groups (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.61-66); but for now Dante has \softline
only divided the sins of violence (cantos XII-XVII) and fraud (cantos XVIII-XXXIV) into these \softline
two large groups.  On }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 malizia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Mazzoni, pp. 10-14; he demonstrates that for Dante, following \softline
St. Thomas, malice reflects }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 voluntas nocendi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the will to do harm.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil divides the sins of violence (synonymous with those of force) into three \softline
subsidiary {\u8216\'91}rings{\u8217\'92} (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gironi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  These are, in order of their gravity, violence against God (cantos XIV-XVIII), against one{\u8217\'92}s self (canto XIII), and against one{\u8217\'92}s neighbor (canto XII).  As Mazzoni \softline
explains (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Canto XI dell{\u8217\'92}{\u8221\'94}Inferno{\u8221\'94}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Neapolitana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ], dir. P. Giannantonio [Naples: \softline
Loffredo, 1985], p. 15), these three categories are derived from St. Thomas, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Summa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I-II, q. 72, a. \softline
4.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Now, in the order in which we witness them, Virgil describes the three categories \softline
of the sin of violence more fully, here violence against others, whether directed against their \softline
persons or their property (canto XII).  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Those violent against themselves or their own property are in the second ring \softline
(canto XIII).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The third ring encloses those who are violent against God by blaspheming him \softline
(canto XIV); {\u8216\'91}violent{\u8217\'92} against nature in the commission of unnatural sexual acts (sodomy, \softline
identified by the reference to Sodom, punished in canto XV -- see the confirmation at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVI.79, where the penitent homosexuals cry out {\u8216\'91}Soddoma{\u8217\'92} against their past sins); violent \softline
against {\u8216\'91}art,{\u8217\'92} exemplified in the reference to Cahors, the town in southern France which, in the \softline
middle ages, had become synonymous with usury (see Virgil{\u8217\'92}s further explanation at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.97-111).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Turning at last to fraud, Virgil now divides it into two kinds, depending on \softline
whether or not it is practised against those who trust in one or not.  He first describes the second \softline
and lesser kind, {\u8216\'91}simple fraud,{\u8217\'92} as it were, committed by those who are punished in the eighth \softline
Circle, which we shall learn (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.1) is called {\u8216\'91}Malebolge{\u8217\'92} after the ten {\u8216\'91}evil pockets{\u8217\'92} that \softline
contain them (cantos XVIII-XXX).  Here Dante for whatever reason (to keep his readers on their \softline
toes?) allows Virgil to name the sins in no discernible order, while also omitting two of them: (6) \softline
hypocrisy, (2) flattery, (4) divination, (10) counterfeiting, (7) thievery, (3) simony, (1) pandering \softline
[and seducing, not mentioned here], (5) barratry; totally omitted from mention are (8) false \softline
counsel and (9) schismatic deeds.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The second form of fraud, that which severs not only the tie of affection that is \softline
natural to humans but that even more sacred one which binds human beings in special \softline
relationships of trust, is referred to as treachery (v. 66).  Such sinners occupy the ninth Circle \softline
(cantos XXXI-XXXIV).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having told Virgil that his discourse has been clear and convincing, the \softline
protagonist nonetheless reveals that he has not quite got it; why, he asks, are not the angry and \softline
sullen (canto VIII), the lustful (canto V), the gluttonous (canto VI), and the avaricious and \softline
prodigal (canto VII) punished inside the city of Dis if God holds them in his righteous anger?  \softline
And if He doesn{\u8217\'92}t, why are they in the state of affliction they are in?  Dante has set up his reader \softline
with this inattentive question.  The protagonist thinks that Virgil{\u8217\'92}s analysis of God{\u8217\'92}s wrath at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
X.22 makes God hate only }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 malizia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and does not understand the relationship between that form of \softline
sin and incontinence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   After chastising Dante for his foolishness, Virgil clarifies the situation.  Aristotle, \softline
he says, in the seventh book of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ethics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  treats the three dispositions of the soul that Heaven \softline
opposes.  These are incontinence, malice (the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 malizia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.22), and {\u8216\'91}mad brutishness{\u8217\'92} (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 matta \softline
bestialitade}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  The clarity of this statement should not have left so much vexation in its wake, but \softline
it has.  For a thorough review of the debate and a solution of the problems that caused it see \softline
Francesco Mazzoni{\u8217\'92}s lengthy gloss to these verses, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Canto XI dell{\u8217\'92}{\u8221\'94}Inferno{\u8221\'94}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis 
Neapolitana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), dir. P. Giannantonio (Naples: Loffredo, 1985), pp. 25-45.  {\u8216\'91}Malice,{\u8217\'92} just as it did \softline
when it was first used, identifies violence and fraud; {\u8216\'91}mad brutishness{\u8217\'92} refers to treachery.  As \softline
Mazzoni demonstrates, both in Aristotle and in Thomas{\u8217\'92}s commentary on the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ethics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (and \softline
elsewhere in his work), {\u8216\'91}bestiality{\u8217\'92} is one step beyond malice, just as it is here in Dante; in \softline
Thomas{\u8217\'92}s words it is a {\u8216\'91}magnum augmentum Malitiae,{\u8217\'92} i.e., a similar but worse kind of sin.  \softline
Nonetheless, there are those who argue that, since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 malizia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  eventually comes to encompass }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 both}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
kinds of fraud (those punished in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 both}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the eighth and ninth Cirlces), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 matta bestialitade}{\plain \fs24 \f1  cannot \softline
refer to treachery.  Yet if they consider the way in which Dante has handled his various definitions \softline
they might realize that he has done here just what he has done at vv. 22-24: he identifies {\u8216\'91}malice{\u8217\'92} \softline
with violence and fraud and then (at vv. 61-66) adds a third category (and second category of \softline
fraud), treachery, just as he does here.  Cesare Vasoli ("Il canto XI dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 \softline
[1992]), pp. 12-19, strongly supports Mazzoni's reading.  For a strong and helpful summary (in \softline
English) of the debate, with arguments similar to and conclusions identical with Mazzoni{\u8217\'92}s, see \softline
Alfred A. Triolo ({\u8220\'93}Malice and Mad Bestiality,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis: {\u8220\'93}Inferno{\u8221\'94}}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. A. \softline
Mandelbaum, A. Oldcorn, C. Ross [Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998], pp. 150-64), \softline
whose own initial work on the subject dates to 1968 (see his bibliographical note).  Baranski \softline
("L'esegesi medievale della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  e il problema delle fonti," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 "Chiosar con altro testo": \softline
Leggere Dante nel Trecento}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Fiesole: Cadmo, 2001]), pp. 23-31, argues for the contradictory \softline
nature of the two passages without, however, bringing into play the observations of Triolo, \softline
Mazzoni, or Vasoli.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Now fully cognizant of the grand design of hell, Dante (like some of his readers?) \softline
admits he is having difficulty with one particular: usury.  How does it {\u8216\'91}offend God{\u8217\'92}s goodness{\u8217\'92} \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.48)?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Weaving strands of Aristotle and St. Thomas, Virgil demonstrates that nature \softline
takes her course from the divine mind, and that {\u8216\'91}art{\u8217\'92} then follows nature.  Mankind, fallen into sin, \softline
as is recorded in Genesis (Genesis 3:17), must earn its bread in the sweat of its brow, precisely by \softline
following the rules of nature and whatever craft it practices.  And for this reason usurers are \softline
understood as sinning against nature, God{\u8217\'92}s child, and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 her}{\plain \fs24 \f1  child, {\u8216\'91}art{\u8217\'92} (in the sense of {\u8216\'91}craft{\u8217\'92}), thus \softline
the {\u8216\'91}grandchild{\u8217\'92} of God and all the more vulnerable to human transgression.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-115.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Telling time by the stars he cannot see but remembers (here the constellation \softline
Pisces [{\u8216\'91}the Fishes{\u8217\'92}] in the east and the Big Dipper [the Wain], lying to the northwest [Caurus, the \softline
northwest wind]), Virgil tells Dante it is time to continue the journey, since it is already ca. 4:00 \softline
am in Italy.  They have been descending for ten hours, and have only fourteen left to them, since \softline
the entire trip down will take exactly twenty-four hours, 6:00 pm Friday evening until 6:00 pm \softline
Saturday (Jerusalem/Italian time).\par
}}