{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 12}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Canto XI had been without event after its first nine lines (the visit to the tomb of \softline
Pope Anastasius).  Since the action now picks up from there, some distance along the rim of the \softline
abyss (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.115), the poet reminds us of the last canto{\u8217\'92}s opening description of a rocky \softline
ledge leading down, now adding a detail: there is something unpleasant on that slope.  The \softline
reader{\u8217\'92}s curiosity must wait until verse 12 (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.12) to be slaked.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-10.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the landslide near Trent (in northern Italy, carrying down into the river Adige) \softline
and discussion of it in Albertus Magnus, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De meteoris}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see Singleton{\u8217\'92}s comment to these verses \softline
(XII.4-6): Benvenuto da Imola was the first to identify the landslide as that at Slavini di Marco \softline
and to mention Albert{\u8217\'92}s reference to it.  Opinion is divided as to whether Dante actualy visited \softline
this landmark or had merely read about it in Albert{\u8217\'92}s treatise, which was well known to him.  This \softline
is the first simile since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.112-117, thus creating the longest stretch in the poem between \softline
similes except for that between }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.1 and VIII.15 (unless we were to count the brief \softline
comparison at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.8-9 as a simile).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 12-13.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'The infamy of Crete' is the Minotaur (only identified by name at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.25), half \softline
man and half bull, conceived by the sexually venturesome Pasipha{\f2\u235\'eb} [wife of Minos, king of Crete] \softline
with a bull, when she placed herself in a wooden replica of a cow in order to enjoy a bovine \softline
embrace.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio }{\plain \fs24 \f1 XXVI.87 for another reference to her on the Terrace of the purgation \softline
of lust.  As Singleton points out in his commentary (to XII.12), the fact that the Minotaur is \softline
{\u8216\'91}sprawling{\u8217\'92} indicates probably that he has four legs, as does the simile (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.22-25) describing \softline
his enraged movements.  If that is so, Dante has turned from the usual Classical understanding, \softline
which lends him a bull{\u8217\'92}s head and a man{\u8217\'92}s body, to develop his own version of the mythical \softline
creature, with a bull{\u8217\'92}s body and the head of a man.  For the Minotaur{\u8217\'92}s appearance see the study \softline
by Botterill ("The Form of Dante's Minotaur," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Forum Italicum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  22 [1988], pp. 60-76), who, \softline
almost alone, remains unconvinced that Dante{\u8217\'92}s creature has a man{\u8217\'92}s head and bull{\u8217\'92}s body, and \softline
two articles by Achille Tartaro ("Il Minotauro, la 'matta bestialitade' e altri mostri," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Filologia e \softline
critica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  17 [1992], pp. 161-86; "Il Minotauro e i Centauri," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 I "monstra" nell'"Inferno" \softline
dantesco: tradizione e simbologie}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Spoleto: Centro italiano di studi sull'alto medioevo, 1997], pp. \softline
161-76.).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Minotaur had his labyrinthine home on Crete, where his violence was kept \softline
under some control by feeding to him a yearly tribute from Athens of seven maids and seven \softline
youths.  Virgil taunts and thus distracts him, reminding him that he was killed by Theseus, \softline
instructed by the monster{\u8217\'92}s {\u8216\'91}sister{\u8217\'92} Ariadne and guided by her thread back through the labyrinth.  \softline
Now Dante is of course no vengeful Theseus, nor has Virgil{\u8217\'92}s purpose been to convince the \softline
Minotaur that he is, but to taunt him, reminding him of his maddening defeat and death.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Since the Minotaur is the first infernal guardian whom we meet within the walls of Dis (the \softline
rebel angels, the Furies, and the unseen Medusa were located on the city{\u8217\'92}s ramparts in canto IX), \softline
we might want to consider in what way he is different from those we have met in the Circles of \softline
incontinence, Minos (the {\u8216\'91}step-father{\u8217\'92} of the Minotaur, as it were -- canto V), Cerberus (canto \softline
VI), and Plutus (canto VII).  Like Charon (canto III) and Phlegyas (canto VIII), Minos has a \softline
general function, {\u8216\'91}judging{\u8217\'92} all the damned souls who confess their besetting sins to him (Charon 
ferries all across Acheron, Phlegyas seems to be employed in replacing temporarily escaped \softline
sinners in the Styx).  Thus only Cerberus (gluttony) and Plutus (avarice) would seem to represent \softline
a particular sin of incontinence.  The Minotaur (and the matter is much debated) seems to \softline
represent the entire zone of Violence, as Geryon (canto XVI) will represent Fraud and the Giants \softline
(canto XXXI), Treachery.  (There is no such figure for incontinence, perhaps because Charon and \softline
Minos at the beginning of the area in which incontinence is punished have taken up enough \softline
'demonic' poetic space.)  If this hypothesis is correct, then the Minotaur{\u8217\'92}s function is precisely \softline
similar to that of Geryon and of the Giants, and he is the gatekeeper for the entire seventh Circle \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.32).  For his connection to violence see Boccaccio's commentary (to XII.11-13): \softline
'When he had grown up and become a most ferocious animal, and of incredible strength, they tell \softline
that Minos had him shut up in a prison called the labyrinth, and that he had sent to him there all \softline
those whom he wanted to die a cruel death.'  Rossetti (comm. to XII.12-15) sees the Minotaur as \softline
being associated with all three sins of violence punished in this Circle: 'The Minotaur, who is \softline
situated at the rim of this tripartite circle, fed, according to myth, on human limbs (violence \softline
against one's neighbor); according to the poem [v. 14] was biting himself (violence against \softline
oneself) and was conceived in the "false cow" (violence against nature, daughter of God).'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Surely he is wrathful (this canto has more uses of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ira}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [wrath] than any other: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XII.15, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.33, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.49, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.72).  As was pointed out (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.109-114), the wrath punished in Styx was intemperate wrath, a sin of passion and not of hardened will, \softline
while the sin punished here is Aquinas{\u8217\'92}s third sort of anger, that which is kept alive for cold-blooded revenge.  (For a similar opinion, which insists on the distinction between the incontinence \softline
of Filippo Argenti and the intentional, willful behavior that we witness here, see Christopher \softline
Becker, {\u8220\'93}Justice among the Centaurs,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Forum Italicum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  18 [1984], p. 228.)  And that is the sort of \softline
mad anger we see here, first in the Minotaur (who used to eat human flesh, we should remember, \softline
and who would like to have his revenge upon Theseus), then in the Centaurs, and finally in the \softline
sinners punished in this ring.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For discussions of monsters in Dante see G{\f2\u233\'e9}rard Luciani (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Les Monstres dans la "Divine \softline
Com{\f2\u233\'e9}die"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Paris: Lettres Modernes, 1975]) and Virginia Jewiss ("Monstrous Movements and \softline
Metaphors in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Forum Italicum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  32 [1998], pp. 332-46.).  For a wider \softline
discussion of the 'monstrous imagination' see Marie-H{\f2\u233\'e9}l{\f3 \'50}ne Huet, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monstrous Imagination}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-25.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The possible Virgilian source (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.223-224) of Dante's simile was perhaps first \softline
noted by Tommaseo (comm. to XII.22-24): Laoco{\f2\u246\'f6}n, dying beneath the assault of the twin \softline
serpents, bellows like a stricken bull that has momentarily escaped death and is now fleeing from \softline
the altar, because the axe of his executioner has been slightly off target, allowing him a few more \softline
minutes of life.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's corporality is again brought to our attention; only }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 he}{\plain \fs24 \f1  moves physical \softline
things, as Chiron will duly note at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.81 (see the note to XII.76-82)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 32.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ruina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (rockslide), just now referred to in the fourth verse of this canto, is clearly \softline
meant to be understood as having been caused by the earthquake at the Crucifixion (see Matthew \softline
27:51).  For the problematic meaning of the first use of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ruina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the poem see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
V.34.  Later Virgil will say that 'here and elsewhere' the rock was broken (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.45), pointing 
us ahead to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII.137 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.24, where Dante and Virgil will traverse another pile of \softline
similarly fallen scree.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Wrath, punished in the Styx (the fifth Circle) is here distinguished from 'bestial' wrath \softline
that is the sign of a hardened will to do violence.  As was the case in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.83 (see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.76-90) Dante uses the word 'bestial' to increase the heinousness of a kind of sin.  Wrath is \softline
a sin of Incontinence; 'bestial wrath,' a sin of Violence; fraud is a sin of malice, 'mad brutishness' \softline
(treachery) a sin of greater malice.  The reader should be warned that this view is not shared by \softline
many commentators.  See the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.22-27 and to XI.76-90.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 IX.22-27 where Virgil tells of his previous journey down through the \softline
underworld, when he was sent to the ninth Circle by the witch Erichtho (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IX.19-27).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 38-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrasing of Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 che la gran preda / lev{\f3 \'62} a Dite}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (carried off from Dis the \softline
great spoil) is likely to echo a phrase in the hymn of the Cross of Venantius Fortunatus, 'Vexilla \softline
regis prodeunt' (The banners of the King come forward -- cited by Dante at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.1), \softline
where Christ is described as having harrowed the souls of the Hebrew patriarchs and matriarchs \softline
from Limbo: 'praedam tulitque Tartari' (He bore off the great spoil of Tartarus).  The passage was \softline
apparently first noted by Bianchi (comm. to XII.38-39).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 'Dis' here refers to Lucifer: see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIV.20.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's explanation of what happened in the immediate aftermath of the \softline
Crucifixion shows a correct temporal and physical understanding (he, after all, actually witnessed \softline
these phenomena 53 years after he arrived in Limbo).  However, his use of the Greek poet and \softline
philosopher Empedocles (ca. 492-430 B.C.) as authority shows his ingrained pagan way of \softline
accounting for one of Christianity's greatest miracles, Christ's ransoming of souls committed to \softline
hell.  According to Empedocles (first referred to at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.138), in addition to the four elements \softline
(earth, water, air, fire) there were two others, and these governed the universe in alternating \softline
movements of love (concord) and hatred (chaos).  As chaos moves toward concord, crowned by \softline
love, that very order, momentarily established, at once recedes and moves back toward chaos.  \softline
This 'circular' theory of history is intrinsically opposed to the Christian view, in which Christ's \softline
establishment of love as a universal principle redeemed history once and for all.  In Virgil's \softline
apparent understanding, the climactic event in Christian history marked only the beginning of a \softline
(final?) stage of chaos.  For an appreciation of the importance of Virgil's misunderstanding of the \softline
meaning of the Crucifixion see Lawrence Baldassaro ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII: The Irony of Descent,{\u8221\'94} \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Romance Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  19 [1978]), p. 101.  For Dante's knowledge of Empedocles' theories through \softline
Aristotle, Albertus Magnus, and St. Thomas see Giorgio Stabile, 'Empedocle' (ED.1970.2), p. \softline
667.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sinners against their neighbors and/or their property are clearly identified as being \softline
guilty of the sin of violence, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 forza}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (force), the first area of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 malizia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , according to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.22-24.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet's apostrophe (see the similar ones at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.19-21, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.16-18) \softline
would seem to identify two of the most immediate causes of violent acts, cupidity and wrath.  See 
Guido da Pisa's comment to this passage: 'the violence that is inflicted on a neighbor arises either \softline
from cupidity or wrath' (comm. to XII.49-51).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 56-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Patrolling the river of blood (identified only later [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.116] as 'Phlegethon') \softline
from its bank are the Centaurs.  Some early commentators saw in them a portrait of the bands of \softline
mercenary cavalrymen who were such an important feature of the horrendous wars of Dante's \softline
divided Italy.  As Dante presents them they are seen as replicating their cruel habits as hunters in \softline
the world above.  For their role as hunters, see Tartaro ("Il Minotauro, la 'matta bestialitade' e \softline
altri mostri," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Filologia e critica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  17 [1992], p. 173), citing John of Salisbury, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Policraticus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
I.iv.393d.  The original centaurs, in Greek myths that came to Dante through various Latin poets, \softline
were the 'sons' of Ixion and a cloud made to resemble Juno, whom Ixion desired to ravish when \softline
Jupiter allowed him entrance to Olympus.  His sperm, falling to earth, created 100 centaurs (their \softline
name reflects their number, 'centum,' and their airy beginning, 'aura,' or so believed some early \softline
commentators, e.g., Guido da Pisa [comm. to XII.55-56]; Pietro di Dante [Pietro1, comm. to \softline
XII.55-57], and John of Serravalle [comm. to XII.52-57]).  Their career on earth involved \softline
attempted rape at the wedding feast of Pirithous and Hippodamia, where it was necessary for \softline
Hercules to intercede in order to disperse them.  The centaurs represent the particular sin of \softline
violence to others, turned to God's use in punishing those mortals who also sinned in this way.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The centaurs take Virgil and Dante for wandering damned souls and one of them \softline
(we learn that this is Nessus at v. 67) challenges them.  His words, 'Tell us from there.  If not, I \softline
draw my bow' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ditel costinci; se non, l'arco tiro}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), are probably modelled on Charon's to the \softline
armed figure of Aeneas (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.389): 'fare age, quid venias, iam istinc, et comprime gressum' \softline
(tell me, even from there, why you come here, and hold your steps).  The citation is perhaps first \softline
found in Daniello (comm. to XII.63).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil accords greater authority to Chiron than to the other centaurs.  Dante's view \softline
of him reflects the fact that he was not sired by Ixion's lust, but by the former Olympian-in-chief: \softline
'Saturn, enamored of Philyra and fearing the jealousy of his wife, Rhea, changed himself into a \softline
horse and in this shape begat Chiron, who took the form of a centaur.  Chiron educated Achilles, \softline
Aesculapius, Hercules, and many other famous Greeks, and Virgil knows at once that, because he \softline
is the wisest, he must be the leader of the band' (Singleton's commentary to XII.65]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Nessus, on the other hand, is one of the Ixion-created centaurs.  When he tried to \softline
rape Hercules' wife, Deianira, according to the ninth book of Ovid's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metamorphoses}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the great \softline
hero shot him with a poisoned arrow as Nessus was crossing a stream with Deianira on his back.  \softline
Dying, the centaur dipped a tunic into his own poisoned blood (thus explaining exactly what \softline
Dante meant when he says 'fashioned of himself his own revenge') and gave it to Hercules' wife, \softline
telling her that whoever put on that tunic would become enamored of her.  Years later, when \softline
Hercules fell in love with Iole, Deianira gave him the tunic.  He put it on, experienced \softline
excruciating pain, and committed suicide to end his agony.  Vengeful, Nessus displays his \softline
connection to violence against others, and precisely that 'difficult' anger described by St. Thomas \softline
(see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.109-114).  See the later reference to it, describing a sinner in the willful \softline
sin of wrath: 'de la vendetta ghiotto' (starving for revenge -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.122).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-71.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Chiron's bowed head may be intended to suggest wisdom or an attitude of \softline
meditation, as most commentators believe, since he was considered to be the wisest of all the \softline
centaurs; but it also serves to direct the reader's gaze to the creature's breast, where its two \softline
natures, human and bestial, are joined' (Singleton, comm. to XII.70).  For Chiron as teacher of \softline
Achilles see at least Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Achil}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.118).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Pholus, like Nessus, and unlike Chiron, whose violence is tempered (and thus made \softline
more effective?) by reason, has no better nature to recommend him.  He, begotten by Ixion like \softline
Nessus, like Nessus died at the hands of Hercules in most of the various Latin versions of the tale \softline
that Dante knew, but as the result of an accident: he himself dropped one of Hercules' poisoned \softline
arrows on his foot and died.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   More numerous than the classical centaurs (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.56-57), \softline
Dante's number in the thousands, firing their arrows at any who rise more out of the river of blood \softline
than their guilt allows.  We come to understand that degree of sinfulness controls the depth of \softline
immersion: sinners are variously swathed in blood up to their eyebrows (v. 103: murderous \softline
tyrants); throats (116: murderers); waists (121: plunderers); feet (125: unspecified).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Some commentators believe that Dante's conception of this river of blood was influenced \softline
by his experience as a cavalryman at the battle of Campaldino in 1289, when the slaughter made \softline
the rivulets crossing the terrain run with blood.  For a description and analysis of that battle see \softline
Herbert L. Oerter, "Campaldino, 1289," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Speculum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  43 (1968), pp. 429-50.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-82.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Chiron's remarks are put to the service of reminding the reader of the uniqueness \softline
of this fleshly visitor to hell.  The 'realism' of the detail (when he is described as moving the \softline
bristles of his beard with an arrow) has understandably pleased many; it perhaps also forces us to \softline
wonder whether the demons of hell have a fleshly or only a spirit presence, for if Dante can move \softline
things with his body, apparently Chiron can also -- his own beard with the nock of an arrow.  This \softline
question is never confronted by Dante, who leaves the ontological status of the demons of hell \softline
unresolved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88-89.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   One of the few references to Beatrice heard in hell.  An appeal to such authority is \softline
perhaps made to Chiron in view of his unusual rational powers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 93-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's request that one of the centaurs bear Dante on his back to cross over the \softline
river of blood will be answered indirectly, between vv. 114 and 115 (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.114-115).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'tour' of the river of blood is only now ready to begin, under the guidance of \softline
Nessus, perhaps because Ovid had said of him that he was 'membrisque valens scitusque vadorum' \softline
(strong of limb and schooled in fording streams -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.108).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Romano Penna (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paul the Apostle: Wisdom and Folly of the Cross}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , tr. Thomas P. \softline
Wall, vol. II [Collegeville, MN: The Liturgical Press, 1996 (1991)]), p. 276, believes that the \softline
description of the tyrants, up to their eyebrows in blood, derives from the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Visio Pauli}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (31).  \softline
Berthier (comm. [1892-97] to XII.103-106) cites the similar description in the vision (of hell and \softline
paradise) of the twelfth-century monk Alberico of Montecassino.  According to Raoul Manselli, it 
is highly unlikely that Dante could have known this text ("Alberico," ED.1970.1, p. 93).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 104.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   With regard to tyrants Jacopo della Lana (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.Nota), referring to \softline
Aristotelian discussions of governance, alludes to the distinction between good and bad individual \softline
rulers: 'Da uno solo pu{\f3 \'62} esser retta in due maniere.  O quello uno rettore ha buona intenzione, e \softline
tutto suo volere {\f3 \'50} di amplificare lo bene e l'onore de' suoi cittadini: e questo tale {\f3 \'50} appellato Re.  \softline
O elli ha tutta la contraria volont{\f3 \'42} d'estirpare e consumare lo bene e lo onore de' suoi cittadini.  E \softline
questo {\f3 \'50} appellato tiranno, sicome dice Uguiccione: "tyrannus est pessimus et improbus rex, et \softline
dicitur a tyro, quod est angustia quod angustiat et cruciat suos"' (A single ruler may govern in two \softline
ways; either he has good intentions, acting with all his will so as to amplify the good and honor of \softline
his subjects (and he is referred to as a king), or he has the contrary desire, wishing to uproot and \softline
destroy the good and honor of his subjects.  And such a ruler is referred to as a tyrant, just as \softline
Uguccione [da Pisa] says: 'a tyrant is a very bad, a wicked king, and the word derives from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tyro}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
which is distress, because he distresses and tortures his subjects').  Dante's own negative view of \softline
tyrants, seen as serving themselves rather than the state which they govern, is found in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
III.iv.10).  For an overview of the historical/political interests reflected in canto XII see Umberto \softline
Carpi, "I tiranni (a proposito di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 (1998), pp. 7-31.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first (and worst) group of the violent against others are the tyrants, \softline
including Alexander the Great and Dionysius the Elder of Syracuse.  Both these identities are \softline
disputed, some modern commentators arguing for Alexander of Pherae, some for Dionysius the \softline
Younger, the son of the Elder.  Singleton's notes to the passage offer convincing support for both \softline
traditional identifications (comm. to XII.107).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Ezzelino III da Romano (1194-1259), Ghibelline strongman in the March of Treviso in \softline
northern Italy, was, in Guelph eyes, a monster of cruelty.  See Giovanni Villani's account of his \softline
misdeeds, cited by Singleton (comm. to XII.110).  He is coupled with a Guelph, {\f3 \'61}pizzo II d'Este \softline
(1247-1293), lord of Ferrara and a supporter of the French forces in Italy and of the Pope.  His \softline
violence was rewarded in life by his murder at the hands of either his own and 'denatured' son or \softline
his illegitimate ('natural') offspring (the commentators are divided).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 114-115.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In handing Dante over to Nessus, Virgil does not tell him to 'mount up.'  Yet \softline
this is what we should almost certainly understand is happening.  The rest of the canto, until its \softline
final line, takes place with Dante looking down from Nessus' back.  This is almost clear when we \softline
consider the next verse: 'A little farther on the centaur stopped.'  Up to now the movements of \softline
Dante and Virgil have been noted as they made their way along; now it is the centaur's movement \softline
which is recorded.  Why?  Because Dante is sitting on his back.  Why did the poet handle this part \softline
of the journey so delicately?  Perhaps because he was aware that the scene would have been \softline
'outrageous,' a Dante on horseback in hell, too much for a reader to accept.  In such a view, he \softline
once again invites the reader to become his accomplice in making his fiction.  (For discussion see \softline
Hollander, "Dante on Horseback? [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII, 93-126]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  61 [1984], pp. 287-96 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 116-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This slightly less bloodied crew contains 'mere' murderers, only one of whom is \softline
indicated (by periphrasis): Guy de Montfort (1243-1298), of royal English blood, in order to \softline
avenge his father Simon's murder killed his cousin, Henry of Cornwall in a church at Viterbo in \softline
1271, supposedly while Henry was praying during the elevation of the Host.  Henry's heart, 
returned to England, 'still drips with blood' because his murder was not avenged.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Those who rise higher out of the blood are generally understood to be the non-murderous violent.  It seems likely that their counterpart group, perhaps 180}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  across the river, is \softline
the final one referred to before the end of the canto (vv. 134-137).  Dante recognizes many of the \softline
present group, thus perhaps asking us to understand that they are local Tuscan ruffians.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-125.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Although those who merely stand in blood are not further identified in any way, \softline
we may assume that they were the least destructive of those violent against the property of others, \softline
perhaps pickpockets and others of that ilk.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Not every reader notices that at this point Dante (astride Nessus's back, we may \softline
want to remember) crosses over the river of blood.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As he crosses toward the far side of the river (the one nearer to the center of \softline
hell) Nessus looks back over the area they have traversed (to their right), where the river grew \softline
increasingly shallow, and then looks left, where, he knows, the river bed gradually deepens until it \softline
reaches its lowest point, which coincides with the first place Dante saw, that in which the tyrants \softline
are punished.  This information suggests that Dante and Virgil have traversed a semi-circle in \softline
order to reach this shallowest point, where they have forded the river.  The unexplored run of the \softline
river thus also occupies 180}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the circle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The only group referred to in the unexplored bend of the river includes those \softline
whose violence was limited to property, the group parallel in placement to the third group seen by \softline
Dante in his journey along Phlegethon.  This new group is situated roughly half way along the \softline
untraversed semi-circle.  The five identified personages that he has already seen in the one he has \softline
traveled are in parallel with the five he will only hear described: Attila the Hun (ca. 406-453), \softline
Pyrrhus of Epirus (ca. 318-272 B.C.), and Sextus Pompeius Magnus (d. 35 B.C.), the son of \softline
Pompey the Great, who, according to Lucan, disgraced the family name when he turned pirate \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.119-122).  The identities of second two are sometimes disputed; one reason to think \softline
that they are as given here is that the resulting group of exemplary plunderers has in common its \softline
depredations of Rome.  For a brief and clear representation of the various confusions among \softline
potential identities for Pyrrhus and Sextus see Botterill ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine \softline
Comedy", Introductory Readings, I:"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Special issue, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Virginiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. I], \softline
ed. T. Wlassics [Charlottesville, Va.: University of Virginia, 1990]), p. 156.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'moderns' are represented by two highwaymen named Rinier, both \softline
contemporaries of Dante.  Rinier da Corneto worked the wild country around Rome, the \softline
Maremma, while Rinier Pazzo, dead by 1280, had his turf in the roads south of Florence and \softline
toward Arezzo.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   His task accomplished, Nessus crosses back over the river of blood without a word.  \softline
It seems clear that he would not have crossed over had he not been carrying Dante on his back.\par
}}