{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 13}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-3.}{\plain \fs24   Ettore Paratore ("Analisi 'retorica' del canto di Pier della Vigna," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  42 \softline
[1965],}{\plain \fs24  pp. 281-82) has studied the phenomenon of the 'connected canti' of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24 , those, \softline
like XII and XIII, in which the action flows from one into the other, in which a canto is not 'end-stopped.'  He counts 16 such in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ; 10 in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 ; 8 in }{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 .  That one third of the \softline
borders of Dante's cantos are so fluid helps us to understand that he has a strong a sense of \softline
delineation of the units of the whole and, at the same time, a desire not to be restrained by these \softline
borders.  For a recent reading of the canto as a whole see Gabriele Muresu, "La selva dei disperati \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIII)," }{\plain \fs24 \i La Rassegna della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24  99 (1995), pp. 5-45.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 4-9.}{\plain \fs24   The very image of infertility, the forest of the suicides is compared, in what is a \softline
simile in feel, but which lacks, like the forest itself, the usual decorative elements, to the wilds of \softline
the Maremma, here between the river Cecina to the north and the town of Corneto to the south, a \softline
wild part of Tuscany.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The vegetation is more of brakes and bushes than of trees, and the dominant impression is \softline
of scraggly enclosure.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 10-15.}{\plain \fs24   The Harpies, heavy birds with the faces of women and clawed hands, the demonic \softline
monsters who preside over this canto (once again, like the Minotaur and the Centaurs, part \softline
human, part beast), derive from Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . III.210-212; }{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . III.216-217; }{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . III.253-257).  \softline
Having twice befouled the food of the Trojan refugees, one of them (Calaeno) then attempts to \softline
convince Aeneas and his followers that they, in their voyage to Italy, are doomed to starvation \softline
and failure. For the classical tradition of the Harpies, especially as found in Lucan, see Sonia \softline
Gentile, "'Ut canes infernales': Cerbero e le Arpie in Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i I "monstra" nell'"Inferno" \softline
dantesco: tradizione e simbologie}{\plain \fs24  (Spoleto: Centro italiano di studi sull'alto medioevo, 1997), pp. \softline
194-203.  And for their meaning as 'false prophets,' counselling despair, see Stephany's article, \softline
"Dante's Harpies: 'tristo annuzio di futuro danno,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i Italica}{\plain \fs24  62 (1985), pp. 24-33.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 20-21.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's words offer the occasion for a certain ingenuity on the part of some \softline
commentators.  Literally, what they mean is clear enough: 'were I only to tell you what you are \softline
about to see, you would not believe me' (i.e., Dante has to experience the speaking vegetation in \softline
order to believe its reality).  But see the note to XIII.46-51.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 24.}{\plain \fs24   Dante, lost in a dark wood, as he was at the beginning of the poem, is }{\plain \fs24 \i smarrito}{\plain \fs24  \softline
(bewildered), as his path was lost (}{\plain \fs24 \i smarrita}{\plain \fs24 ) in that wood (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.3).  The repetition of the word \softline
here seems deliberate, and perhaps invites us to consider the possibility that the lost soul whom \softline
we met in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  I was in some way himself suicidal.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 25.}{\plain \fs24   This is perhaps the most self-consciously 'literary' line in a canto filled with \softline
'literariness.'  See the elegant essay by Leo Spitzer ("Speech and Language in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIII," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Italica}{\plain \fs24  19 [1942], pp. 77-104) for a close analysis of this canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 31-39.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's hesitant gesture and the sinner's horrified response reflect closely a scene \softline
in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  in which Aeneas similarly tears pieces of vegetation from the grave of murdered 
Polydorus, who finally cries out in words that are echoed in this sinner's complaints (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . III.22-48).  Just before the Greeks overran Troy, Priam sent his son Polydorus to be raised by the \softline
Thracian king Polymestor, and with him the treasure of Troy.  Once the city fell, Polymestor \softline
killed Polydorus, stole the treasure, and had the youth's body cast into the sea.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The speaker, we will later learn from the historical details to which he refers (he is never \softline
named), is Pier delle Vigne, the chancellor of Frederick II of Sicily and Naples (see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIII.58-61).  Here he is represented as a 'gran pruno' (tall thorn-bush), and while the \softline
modifying adjective grants him a certain dignity, it also reduces him to the least pleasant of plants.  \softline
The forest of the suicides resembles a dense thicket of briar, the only 'vegetation' found in hell \softline
after the green meadow of Limbo (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.111).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 40-44.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's simile, which sounds like the sounds it describes, reduces Pier's natural \softline
dignity by giving him so distorted a voice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-51.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's apology to Pier for encouraging Dante to pluck a piece of him now clearly \softline
evokes the text of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 , thus adding a dimension to the words he had uttered at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  \softline
XIII.20-21.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 52-54.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's invitation to Pier to speak so that Dante may 'revive his fame' in the world \softline
above has a positive result.  As we move down through hell, we will find that some sinners look \softline
upon their 'interview' with this 'reporter' a wonderful opportunity to attempt to clear their names, \softline
while others shun any 'publicity' at all.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 55-57.}{\plain \fs24   The beginning of Pier's speech is an Italian version of Pier's noted 'chancery style' \softline
of Latin oratory turned to document-writing.  Pier was known not only for his Latin writings on \softline
behalf of Frederick's exercise of his imperial power, but for his vernacular poems, which are \softline
similarly florid.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab His speech to Dante, in its entirety, forms an Italian version of a classical oration, with its \softline
parts measured as follows: (1) capturing of the good will of the audience (55-57); (2) narrative of \softline
events at issue (58-72); (3) peroration, making the climactic point (73-75); (4) petition, seeking \softline
the consent of the audience (76-78).  For a more detailed consideration of the rhetorical \softline
construction of the speech see David C. Higgins ("Cicero, Aquinas, and St. Matthew in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  \softline
XIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  93 [1975]), pp. 63-64.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-61.}{\plain \fs24   The speaker identifies himself, if by circumlocution, as Pier della Vigna (or 'delle \softline
Vigne'): 'Petrus de Vinea, minister of the Emperor Frederick II, born at Capua ca. 1190; after \softline
studying at Bologna, he received an appointment at the court of Frederick II as notary, and \softline
thenceforward he rapidly rose to distinction.  He was made judge and protonotary, and for more \softline
than twenty years he was the trusted minister and confidant of the Emperor.  He was at the height \softline
of his power in 1247, but two years later he was accused of treachery, and was thrown into prison \softline
and blinded; and soon after he committed suicide (April, 1249)' (Paget Toynbee, "Pier della \softline
Vigna," }{\plain \fs24 \i Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 (1898)]).  For the numerous and \softline
widely various accounts of the manner of his death see Fabrizio Franceschini, "Le dieci morti di \softline
Pier della Vigna: commenti danteschi e itinerari medievali," }{\plain \fs24 \i Waib: Quaderni di cultura ghibellina \softline
in Italia}{\plain \fs24  (Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 2000), pp. 47-64.  Further information about the emperor Frederick 
II may be found in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X.119.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Holding the keys to the emperor's heart, the 'promised land' of any self-seeking courtier, \softline
this Peter is a parodic version of St. Peter, who, in the Christian tradition, holds the keys (one for \softline
mercy, one for judgment) that unlock or lock the Kingdom of Heaven.  For the original Biblical \softline
image of the two keys see Isaiah 22:22.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 64.}{\plain \fs24   This 'slut' is commonly recognized as envy, the sin of hoping that one's happy \softline
neighbor will be made unhappy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Pier is trying to establish his innocence of the charges that he betrayed his lord by stealing \softline
from his treasury.  We now know that he was in fact guilty of that fault; however, it is far from \softline
clear that Dante knew what we know.  See Cassell's gathering of evidence for the case against \softline
Pier's barratry (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante's Fearful Art of Justice}{\plain \fs24  [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984], pp. \softline
38-42).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 68.}{\plain \fs24   'Augustus,' the emperor }{\plain \fs24 \i par excellence}{\plain \fs24 , is Pier's title for his emperor, Frederick.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 70.}{\plain \fs24   Pier's }{\plain \fs24 \i disdegnoso gusto}{\plain \fs24 , whether pleasure in self-hatred (see Steno Vazzana, "Il \softline
'disdegnoso gusto' di Pier de le Vigne," }{\plain \fs24 \i L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  11 [1998], pp. 91-94, for this reading) or \softline
pleasure in imagining his vengeance upon his enemies (see Higgins ["Cicero, Aquinas, and St. \softline
Matthew in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  93 (1975)], p. 72), is presented as the motive for his \softline
suicide.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 73-75.}{\plain \fs24   For a reading of these climactic words of Pier's oration, his oath, sworn on 'this \softline
tree's new-sprung roots,' that he did not break faith with Frederick, see the endnote to this canto.  \softline
For discussion of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i nove}{\plain \fs24 , which has been understood variously as meaning 'recent,' \softline
'strange,' 'singular,' and even 'nine,' see Claudia Villa, "'Per le nove radici d'esto legno': Pier della \softline
Vigna, Nicola della Rocca (e Dante): anamorfosi e riconversione di una metafora," }{\plain \fs24 \i Strumenti \softline
critici}{\plain \fs24  15 (1991), pp. 131-44. Here the word }{\plain \fs24 \i nove}{\plain \fs24 , would seem most naturally to refer to the new \softline
'roots' of his 'body,' replacing those that God and nature had given him for his natural life.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab How are we meant to respond to Pier, an unquestionably imposing figure?  Here is Attilio \softline
Momigliano, in his commentary to this passage (XIII.55-78): '[Pier's] way of speaking, with its \softline
lofty sense of fidelity, with its steady clearsightedness, with its manly rebellion against the injustice \softline
of fate, with that indestructible sense of his honor and the desire to redeem it, even in death -- all \softline
of these dressed in the folds of an austerely embellished eloquence -- dwells in our memory like a \softline
solemn portrait of a courtier and makes us forget the fault of the suicide, as the words of \softline
Francesca, Brunetto, or Ugolino make us forget adultery, sodomy, betrayal.  These virtues or \softline
passions that redeem, even in hell, a great sin are among the most noble and suggestive inventions \softline
of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24 .'  Such a view of the 'great sinners' of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  is attractive, no doubt, in part \softline
because it makes Dante a much less 'judgmental' poet than in fact he is.  However, it is probably \softline
better to see that, in the case of Pier (as well as in that of the others mentioned by Momigliano), \softline
the sinner speaks of himself in such a way as to condemn himself in his own words, at least if we \softline
learn to read him from the ironic angle of vision that the split between consciousness of the \softline
slowly-evolving protagonist and the knowledgeable poet surely seems to call for.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab It was centuries ago that a reader first thought of Judas when he read of Pier.  Pietro di \softline
Dante, in the second redaction of his commentary (Pietro2 to XIII.16-51), cites St. Jerome's 
comment on Psalm 8: 'Judas offended God more greatly by hanging himself than by betraying \softline
Him.'  Dante's son, however, never developed the importance of Judas as the quintessential \softline
suicide in the controling image of this canto.  In our own time perhaps the first to do so was \softline
Gianvito Resta ("Il canto XIII dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i "Inferno": letture degli anni 1973-1976}{\plain \fs24 , ed. S. \softline
Zennaro [Rome: Bonacci, 1977], pp. 335-36); a fuller expression of this insight was developed by \softline
Anthony Cassell (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante's Fearful Art of Justice}{\plain \fs24  [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984], \softline
pp. 46-56).  While Cassell's reading mainly involves Pier's betrayal of Frederick, the perhaps better \softline
understanding is to allow Pier his proclaimed fealty to his emperor, but to realize that his very \softline
words reveal that, if his temporal allegiances were respected, they had displaced his only truly \softline
significant loyalty, that owed to his only meaningful Lord, Jesus Christ (see Dennis Looney,  \softline
"Believing in the Poet: }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i Allegorica}{\plain \fs24  13 [1992], p. 39).  The denial of Christ's \softline
authority was much a part of the behaviors of the emperor whom he served, Frederick II, revealed \softline
as punished for his heresy a few cantos earlier (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X.119).  It is difficult to read his words in any \softline
other way: 'I give my oath: not once did I break faith with my true lord.'  Even if we allow Pier his \softline
claim (and we do not find him punished in the ninth Circle, where such a sin might have located \softline
him for eternity), a deeper reading of his 'oath' should make us see that, like Judas, he did betray \softline
his Lord, as Stephany has shown, precisely in his loyalty to the emperor, whom he treats, in his \softline
eulogy of Frederick, as in his own kingly person being all the Christ one needed.  And thus, in \softline
imitation of Judas, he will have his body hanging on a tree for eternity.  (For two articles about \softline
Frederick, Pier, and the court life that they shaped and shared, see Christie Fengler and William \softline
Stephany, "The Capuan Gate and Pier della Vigna," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  99 [1981], pp. 145-57; and \softline
Stephany, "Pier della Vigna's Self-fulfilling Prophecies: the 'Eulogy' of Frederick II and }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  \softline
13," }{\plain \fs24 \i Traditio}{\plain \fs24  38 [1982], pp. 193-212.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Pier, as many have noted, has important attributes in common with Dante.  Both were \softline
political figures who ended up losing the goals of their highly energized activity; both were poets.  \softline
Yet it seems clear that, for all the fellow-feeling that Dante must have felt for the ruined \softline
chancellor, he is more interested in the crucial errors he made in directing his political life to the \softline
sharing and taking of power and to that alone.  For Dante, the political life can only be lived justly \softline
under the sign of the true 'emperor,' God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 82-84.}{\plain \fs24   The protagonist, like many readers, has been won over by Pier's oratory.  As was \softline
the case in his meeting with Farinata and Cavalcante in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  X, he began in fear, then turned to \softline
pity.  Neither is an attitude recommended by the moral setting of the poem that contains this \softline
currently piteous protagonist.  Again, see the endnote to this canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 94-102.}{\plain \fs24   Responding to the first of Virgil's two questions on Dante's behalf (the nature of \softline
the punishment accorded the suicides), Pier describes the process by which a suicidal soul is \softline
turned, not into an airy resemblance of its former human self, but into a thing, a thornbush \softline
tortured by Harpies (the despair that led it to self-destruction in the first place).  The commentary \softline
of Durling and Martinez (}{\plain \fs24 \i ad loc}{\plain \fs24 ., Oxford, 1996) suggests that the imprisoned Pier stands in polar \softline
relation to the similarly imprisoned Boethius, who reacted with fortitude and philosophic calm in \softline
the face of the injustice of }{\plain \fs24 \i his}{\plain \fs24  emperor.  As for the image of the 'seed' of the suicide's soul taking \softline
root where it is flung down in this 'forest,' a student at Princeton, Kyle Cameron '03, has recently \softline
suggested that there is a relationship here, by contraries, to the parable of the sower in Luke's \softline
gospel (8:4-15).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 103-108.}{\plain \fs24   The second of Virgil's questions regarded the eventual disposition of the \softline
incarcerated soul.  It will be reincarnated after the Last Judgment, and then hang upon the bush it \softline
is contained by now.  See the endnote to this canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 109-126.}{\plain \fs24   This self-contained unit of twenty-seven verses is devoted to a second class of \softline
those violent against themselves.  These wastrels were 'prodigal' in so thoroughly intentional a \softline
way that they did not casually toss away their possessions, but willfully destroyed them in a sort \softline
of 'material suicide.'  Once again we note the line that Dante has drawn between the incontinent \softline
form of a sin (prodigality, punished in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  VII) and its 'malicious' version.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Paget Toynbee describes the two sinners found here as follows: 'Lano [Arcolano Maconi], \softline
gentleman of Siena, placed by Dante, together with Jacomo da sant' Andrea, among those who \softline
have squandered their substance....  Lano is said to have been a member of the "Spendthrift \softline
Brigade" of Siena, and to have squandered all his property in riotous living.  He took part in an \softline
expedition of the Florentines and Sienese against Arezzo in 1288, which ended in the Sienese \softline
force falling into an ambush and being cut to pieces by the Aretines under Buonconte da \softline
Montefeltro at... Pieve al Toppo.  Lano, being ruined and desperate, chose to fight and be killed, \softline
rather than run away and make his escape; hence the allusion of Jacomo in the text....  Jacomo \softline
[and not Dante's 'Jacopo'] della Cappella di sant' Andrea of Padua, the son of Odorico Fontana da \softline
Monselice and Speronella Delesmanini, a very wealthy lady, whose fortune Jacomo inherited, and \softline
squandered in the most senseless acts of prodigality.  He is supposed to have been put to death by \softline
order of Ezzolino da Romano [see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XII.102] in 1239' (cited from "Lano" and "Jacomo da sant' \softline
Andrea," in Toynbee{\u8219\'27}s }{\plain \fs24 \i Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1914 (1898)]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 130-135.}{\plain \fs24   The relatively minor figure we now encounter, a }{\plain \fs24 \i cespuglio}{\plain \fs24  (bush) and not the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i gran pruno}{\plain \fs24  (tall thornbush -- }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIII.32) that holds the soul of Pier delle Vigne, complains \softline
against the unintentional despoiling of his leaves by the exhausted Jacomo, who had huddled up \softline
against him in order to escape the pursuing hounds.  Various of the early commentators identify \softline
him as either Lotto degli Agli or Rocco de' Mozzi (for review see Berthier, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XIII.151; and for reasons to belive it is the latter who is referred to see Vincenzo Presta, "In \softline
margine al canto XIII dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  90 [1972], pp.19-20), yet some of these \softline
commentators also suggest that Dante left the name 'open' because so many Florentines \softline
committed suicide in this way that he wanted to suggest the frequency of the phenomenon in his \softline
native city.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 139-151.}{\plain \fs24   The nameless suicide, now more careful of his 'body' than he had been when he \softline
took his own life, asks to have his torn-off leaves returned to him.  He identifies himself as \softline
Florentine by referring to the city's first patron, Mars, the god of war, whose replacement by John \softline
the Baptist in Christian times had weakened her, according to his not very reliable view.  (Dante's \softline
sources seem to have confused Attila with Totila, who had in fact besieged the city in 542.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 140.}{\plain \fs24   The phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i strazio disonesto}{\plain \fs24  (shameless carnage) that describes the condition of the \softline
ruined bush probably reflects the description of the mutilated visage of Deiphobus (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . VI.497): \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i inhonesto volnere}{\plain \fs24  (shameful wound), as Pompeo Venturi (comm. to XIII.140) seems to have \softline
been the first to suggest.\par
}}