{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\*\cs1 \additive\ul\cf3 SYS_HYPERTEXT;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 24}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-21.}{\plain \fs24   This elaborate canto-opening simile (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24  .XXII.1-12) and its \softline
aftermath knit the narrative back together: Virgil had walked away from Catalano (and from \softline
Dante) at the end of the last canto; now, getting his anger under control, he turns back to reassure \softline
Dante and continue his leadership.  That is a fair summary of how the simile works as a reflection \softline
of what is happening between the two characters.  However, this simile (like the Aesopic material \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIII.4-18), can be read for more than one set of equivalences: (1) Virgil's frown \softline
(hoarfrost) melts and he once again encourages Dante (the humble wretch), who eventually will, \softline
having completed the journey, feed us (his sheep) on the pages of the poem; (2) the devils' \softline
deception (hoarfrost), in the form of an incorrect presentation of the terrain, discourages Virgil \softline
(the wretch), who finally reads the signs right and will lead Dante (his sheep) to pasture.  A form \softline
of this second simultaneous reading was proposed by Richard Lansing (}{\plain \fs24 \i From Image to Idea: A \softline
Study of the Simile in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Ravenna: Longo, 1977]), pp. 77-80.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab As Margherita Frankel has noted ("Dante's Anti-Virgilian }{\plain \fs24 \i villanello}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  102 \softline
[1984]), pp. 82-83, the simile itself is divided into two rather different stylistic zones; the first six \softline
verses are 'classicizing' and rather high-flown, while the the final nine are in the low style.  \softline
Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i Ad ira parea mosso}{\plain \fs24 : God's Voice in the Garden," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  101 [1983], pp. 27-49, suggests that the first tercet of the 'classical' part derives from Virgil's third }{\plain \fs24 \i Georgic}{\plain \fs24  (vv. 303-304), a citation also found in the second and third redactions of the commentary of Pietro di \softline
Dante, and also noted by Tommaseo.  For other studies in English of this much studied simile see \softline
David J. Baker, "The Winter Simile in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXIV," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  92 (1974), pp. 77-91; \softline
George Economou, "Self-Consciousness of Poetic Activity in Dante and Langland," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Vernacular Poetics in the Middle Ages}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Lois Ebin (Kalamazoo: Medieval Institute \softline
Publications, 1984), pp. 177-98; and Richard Lansing, }{\plain \fs24 \i From Image to Idea: A Study of the Simile \softline
in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1977), pp. 74-80; for Dante's knowledge of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Georgics}{\plain \fs24  see Aristide Marigo, "Le }{\plain \fs24 \i Georgiche}{\plain \fs24  di Virgilio fonte di Dante," }{\plain \fs24 \i Giornale dantesco}{\plain \fs24  17 \softline
(1909), pp. 31-44.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The reference to Aquarius sets the time within the simile as winter, since the sun is in that \softline
constellation from 21 January to 21 February.  And so the sun cools his 'locks' (its rays) in this \softline
season.  For the short-lasting nature of hoarfrost see Lucan (}{\plain \fs24 \i Phars}{\plain \fs24 . IV.53) --  a source perhaps \softline
first noted by Daniello (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIV.6).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 22-24.}{\plain \fs24   The sight of the }{\plain \fs24 \i ruina}{\plain \fs24 , the scree fallen at the Crucifixion, now gives Virgil hope: it \softline
is a way up and out of the }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24 .  Catalano, unlike Malacoda, has given him valuable advice.  For \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i ruina}{\plain \fs24  see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V.34.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 31.}{\plain \fs24   The phrase 'people wearing leaden cloaks' obviously refers to the hypocrites whom \softline
we saw in the last canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 32-36.}{\plain \fs24   The protagonist's physical difficulty, since unlike Virgil he must move his flesh and \softline
bones against the pull of gravity, is insisted on.  The interplay between Virgil and Dante, now with \softline
roles reversed from Cantos XXI-XXIII (when Virgil was the one at a disadvantage) goes on for \softline
some time, through verse 60.  It is in no way meant to make the reader believe, as did John \softline
Ruskin, in }{\plain \fs24 \i Modern Painters}{\plain \fs24 , that 'Dante was a notably bad climber' (in DDP, Ruskin to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . 
XII.2).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 37-40.}{\plain \fs24   Once again (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.35) Dante insists that the far sides, or banks, \softline
of each }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24  are not as high as the ones encountered first, since the sloping floor of the \softline
Malebolge cuts }{\plain \fs24 \i down}{\plain \fs24  across each ditch.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 49-51.}{\plain \fs24   The commentators are almost unanimous in taking Virgil's words at face value and \softline
as sound advice.  See, for example, Chiavacci Leonardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24  \softline
[Milan: Mondadori, 1991], pp. 712-13, who argues for earthly fame's 'double valence' in the \softline
poem'; she claims that it is sometimes an excusable aim (as here), sometimes a culpable one.  \softline
Certainly the net effect of Virgil's appeal here is to get Dante moving upward in order to continue \softline
to the top of the ridge, whence he will be able to see into the next ditch as he continues his \softline
journey.  Yet is it not strange that the motivation offered by Virgil is not the need to struggle \softline
onward toward the presence of God so much as it is the reward of earthly fame?  Rossetti (comm. \softline
to vv. 43-51) was perhaps the first to observe the resonance of what has now become a standard \softline
citation for these verses, the entirely similar similes found in the book of Wisdom (Sap. 5:15): '... \softline
tanquam spuma gracilis quae a procella dispergitur, Et tanquam fumus qui a vento diffusus est' \softline
(like the insubstantial foam that is dispersed by the storm, like the smoke that is is dissipated by \softline
the wind).  In Wisdom the comparisons are to the hopes of the impious man (as opposed to those \softline
of the just, whose thoughts are set on God [Sap. 5:16]).  Narrowly construed, Virgil's words are \softline
those of the impious man who lodges his hopes in the most transitory of things -- exactly what the \softline
poem will later establish as the true and fleeting nature of earthly fame (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XI.91-93).  Read in \softline
this light, Virgil's admonition culminates his series of errors in the three preceding cantos with \softline
what is not only potentially a more serious one, but one of which he himself had been guilty, \softline
taking the lesser good for the greater.  If we were to imagine St. Thomas as guide here, we would \softline
expect his words to have been quite different.  These observations reflect remarks made in a paper \softline
on this passage in November 1999 by a Princeton student, Daniel Cheely '03, the first reader of \softline
this passage known to this commentator to take into consideration the full force of its biblical \softline
source.  For a similar understanding, see Margherita Frankel ("Dante's Anti-Virgilian }{\plain \fs24 \i villanello}{\plain \fs24 ," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  102 [1984]), pp. 94-95, reading Virgil's inappropriate 'sermon' against the \softline
theologically correct view of the fleetingness and unimportance of earthly fame clearly expressed \softline
at }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  XI.100-108.  Beginning with Gregorio Di Siena (comm. to vv.49-51) \softline
commentators also cite another apposite text for these lines, }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  V.740, 'tenuis fugit ceu \softline
fumus in auras': it is the vision of Anchises that vanishes from Aeneas's sight 'like thin smoke into \softline
the air.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Cantos XXI-XXIV thus include Virgil's most difficult moments as guide to the Christian \softline
underworld.  The rest of the }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24  is mainly without such unsettling behavior toward his master \softline
and author on the poet's part.  But this will start up again in a series of moments that are difficult \softline
for Virgil in the early cantos of }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-64.}{\plain \fs24   In a moment that will strike any one who is in fact a 'notably bad climber' (in the \softline
words of John Ruskin -- see the note to vv. 32-36) with its aptness, the passage insists on Dante's \softline
effort to convince his guide that he is better furnished with breath than in fact he is.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 65-66.}{\plain \fs24   These lines introduce a problem (who is speaking?) that will weave itself through 
the text until perhaps the eighteenth verse of the next canto.  In a typically Dante-unfriendly \softline
gesture, Castelvetro objects that these lines are useless and never find a resolution.  As we shall \softline
see, there may be a point to the interpretive exercise that Dante here invites the reader to join.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 67-78.}{\plain \fs24   These twelve verses have no other point than to underline the intensity of Dante's \softline
curiosity about the identity of the speaker whose unintelligible voice he has just heard.  It would \softline
be unlikely for him to have left his riddle unanswered.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXV.17-18.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Verse 69 has been the cause of much debate.  Is the word in the text }{\plain \fs24 \i ire}{\plain \fs24  (as in Petrocchi's \softline
edition, meaning 'to go') or }{\plain \fs24 \i ira}{\plain \fs24  (wrath)?  For a treatment of the problem see Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i Ad ira \softline
parea mosso}{\plain \fs24 : God's Voice in the Garden," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  101 [1983]), pp. 27-49, offering a \softline
listing of the history of the commentary tradition (pp. 29-31) and concluding that the text \softline
originally read }{\plain \fs24 \i ira}{\plain \fs24 , as almost all the early commentators believed, with the major exception of \softline
Pietro di Dante (Pietro1 to vv. 65-69).  For a countering view, see Ruggero Stefanini, "In nota a \softline
un commento," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24  13 (1993), p. 85.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Once again, while not in agreement with it, we have preserved the letter of Petrocchi's text \softline
in our translation.  Berthier, who opts for }{\plain \fs24 \i ira}{\plain \fs24 , cites St. Thomas to the effect that one of the five \softline
effects of wrath is precisely to cause in the furibond sinner 'clamor irrationabilis' (irrational cries), \softline
perhaps exactly what Dante has made out.  See Berthier (comm. to XXIV.64-66).  It also remains \softline
difficult to explain how one can hear, from a distance and in darkness, how a being is moved to \softline
getting into motion, while it is not at all difficult to hear, in precisely these circumstances, that a \softline
voice is moved by wrath.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 79-81.}{\plain \fs24   The new prospect before Dante's eyes, once he is over the seventh }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24 , having \softline
descended from the bridge that connects to the eighth, completely absorbs his attention.  The \softline
identity of the speaker, which he has been so eager to learn, is now forgotten -- for a while.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 82-84.}{\plain \fs24   Now begins the drama of the marvelous, what Milton might have called 'things \softline
unattempted yet in prose or rhyme.'  Many have commented upon the exuberance of Dante's \softline
treatment of the scene of the thieves.  On the question of its perhaps problematic virtuosity of this \softline
and the next canto see Richard Terdiman, "Problematic Virtuosity: Dante's Depiction of the \softline
Thieves (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXIV-XXV)," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  91 (1973), pp. 27-45; for a reply see Peter \softline
Hawkins, "Virtuosity and Virtue: Poetic Self-Reflection in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies }{\plain \fs24 98 \softline
(1980), pp. 1-18.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 85-87.}{\plain \fs24   The serpents derive, as almost all commentators duly note, from the ninth book of \softline
Lucan's }{\plain \fs24 \i Pharsalia}{\plain \fs24  with its description of the Libyan desert, replete with them.  They are all \softline
beyond the pale of any known zoology.  For a catalogue of Lucanian serpentism see Benvenuto \softline
(comm. to XXIV.85-90).  For the texts see Singleton (comm. to XXIV.86-87).  And, for Dante's \softline
knowledge of Lucan more generally, see Ettore Paratore, "Lucano e Dante," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i Antico e nuovo}{\plain \fs24  \softline
(Caltanissetta: Sciascia, 1965), pp. 165-210.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 88-90.}{\plain \fs24   Dante adapts Lucan's somewhat unusual term for 'serpent' (}{\plain \fs24 \i pestis}{\plain \fs24  -- which \softline
generally means 'plague') and now imagines as many deserts as he knows of containing still other \softline
improbable serpentine creatures.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 91-96.}{\plain \fs24   The scene, with its inhabitants naked, afraid, and trying to hide, evokes, as \softline
Hollander has argued ("}{\plain \fs24 \i Ad ira parea mosso}{\plain \fs24 : God's Voice in the Garden," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  101 \softline
[1983], p. 34), the description of Adam and Eve hiding from God in the Garden of Eden after \softline
they have sinned (Genesis 3:9-10): 'Vocavitque Dominus Deus Adam, et dixit ei: "Ubi es?"  Qui \softline
ait, "Vocem tuam audivi in paradiso et timui, eo quod nudus essem, et abscondi me"' (And the \softline
Lord God called Adam and asked, 'Where are you?'  And Adam said, 'I heard your voice in the \softline
garden and I grew afraid, because I was naked, and I hid myself').  Hollander goes on to examine \softline
nine more moments in this scene that reflect the 'primal scene' of thievery in Eden, including the \softline
parodic version of the fig leaves with which Adam and Eve covered their loins in (Genesis 3:7) \softline
found here in vv. 95-96.  See also Rebecca Beal, "Dante among Thieves: Allegorical Soteriology \softline
in the Seventh }{\plain \fs24 \i Bolgia}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXIV and XXV)," }{\plain \fs24 \i Medievalia}{\plain \fs24  9 (1983), pp. 103-5, for \softline
resonances of the Edenic scene in this passage.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The heliotrope was a stone that supposedly had the power to render its possessor invisible, \softline
as Boccaccio's Calandrino was urged to believe by his trickster friends (}{\plain \fs24 \i Decameron}{\plain \fs24  VIII.3).  See \softline
Vincenzo Cioffari, "A Dante Note: }{\plain \fs24 \i Heliotropum}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Romanic Review}{\plain \fs24  28 (1937), pp. 59-62\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 97.}{\plain \fs24   This figure, so rudely attacked, will turn out to be Vanni Fucci (v. 125).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 100.}{\plain \fs24   Since the so-called Ottimo Commento (1333), commentators who have responded \softline
to this verse have agreed that these two letters are written most quickly because they are written \softline
in a single stroke.  But do these two letters signify anything?  For instance, are they a code for \softline
Dante's vaunt against Ovid (i.e., 'I [}{\plain \fs24 \i io}{\plain \fs24 ] can portray metamorphosis even better than you')?  Or do \softline
they represent the negation of Vanni's self (i.e., 'io' spelled backwards)?  For an ingenious \softline
argument, extending this second hypothesis, see D. L. Darby Chapin, "IO and the Negative \softline
Apotheosis of Vanni Fucci," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  89 (1971), pp. 19-31, suggesting an Ovidian source.  \softline
She argues that, when Io was transformed into a cow (}{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . I.646-650), medieval \softline
commentators represented her new hoof-print as made of the two letters of her name, the 'I' \softline
written inside the 'O' so as to represent the cleft in her newly formed hooves.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 107-111.}{\plain \fs24   The reference to the phoenix is also Ovidian (Metam. XV.392-402).  That rare \softline
bird was reputed to live 500 years and then to be reborn out of the ashes of its own perfumed \softline
funeral pyre.  Christian exegetes thus easily took the phoenix as a symbol of Christ (see Rebecca \softline
Beal, "Dante among Thieves: Allegorical Soteriology in the Seventh }{\plain \fs24 \i Bolgia}{\plain \fs24  [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXIV and \softline
XXV]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Medievalia}{\plain \fs24  9 [1983], pp. 105-7).  Vanni, seen in this light, thus parodically enacts the \softline
death and resurrection of Christ.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 119-120.}{\plain \fs24   The poet's exclamation is part of his presentation of himself not as a merely \softline
ingenious teller of fantastic tales, but as the scribe of God, only recording what he actually saw of \softline
God's just retaliation for sins performed against Him.  See Romans 12:19, where Paul offers the \softline
words of God, 'Vengeance is mine; I shall repay,' a passage perhaps first cited in this context by \softline
Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 118-120).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 122-126.}{\plain \fs24   Vanni Fucci's laconic self-identification tells us that he was an illegitimate son \softline
(of the Lazzari family of Pistoia) and insists upon his bestiality (some early commentators report \softline
that his nickname was 'Vanni the Beast').  He died sometime after 1295, when he apparently left 
Pistoia, and 1300 -- although this is not certain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 127-129.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's response indicates that he had once known Vanni and thought of him as \softline
guilty of sins of violence, not necessarily those of fraud.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 132-139.}{\plain \fs24   Vanni's shame and honest self-description give him a certain moral advantage \softline
over many of the dissembling sinners whom we meet.  At the same time his wrathful character \softline
extends not only to self-hatred, but to hatred of others, as his ensuing harsh words for Dante will \softline
reveal (vv. 140-151).  His character, so briefly etched, is that of a familiar enough figure, the \softline
embittered destroyer of any human bond.  He is an equal-opportunity misanthrope.\par
}\fs24{\plain \fs24 \tab The theft of sacred objects from the sacristy of the chapel of St. James in Pistoia -- which \softline
caused an uproar when it occurred, ca. 1293-95 -- was first not laid to his door and he indeed had \softline
left the city before his complicity was revealed by one of his confederates, soon afterwards put to \softline
death for his part in the crime.  There is speculation that the eventual truth of Vanni's involvement \softline
was only discovered after 1300, yet in time for Dante to present it as 'news' here in his poem.  \softline
Julia Holloway ("Brunetto Latino and Dante Alighieri: Stealing Hercules{\u8219\'27} Club [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXV{\u8219\'27}s \softline
Metamorphoses]" [}{\field{\*\fldinst   { HYPERLINK "(http://www.florin.ms/Lectura.html" }}{\fldrslt{{\ul\cf2 http://www.florin.ms/Lectura.html}}}}{\plain \fs24  (2003 [1993])] has suggested that Vanni's \softline
theft of the silver-relief statues of the Virgin and the Apostles from the treasury of the cathedral of \softline
Pistoia was seen by Dante as a latter-day version of the theft of the Palladium by Ulysses and \softline
Diomedes (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.63).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 140-142.}{\plain \fs24   Vanni's prophecy is the last of these 'personal prophecies' found in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 .  \softline
There are nine of these in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24 .  (See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VI.64-66.)  He offers it as a form of \softline
revenge on Dante for having seen him in such distress.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 143-150.}{\plain \fs24   The riddling expression of the language of prophecy is, at least for a \softline
contemporary of Vanni's and Dante's, for the most part not difficult to unravel.  Pistoia's White \softline
Guelphs will drive out the Black party in 1301; Florence's Blacks will do the same in the same \softline
year to the Whites in that city (with one consequence being Dante's exile).  In 1302 the Blacks of \softline
Pistoia, allied with Moroello Malaspina ('the headlong bolt'), will have their revenge upon the \softline
Whites, taking their stronghold at Serravalle.  Some understand that Vanni also (or only) refers to \softline
the eventual Black victory over the Whites in Pistoia itself in 1306.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 151.}{\plain \fs24   Vanni's acerbic ending, personalizing the prophecy as a way of making Dante grieve, \softline
is his tit-for-tat response for the grief that Dante has caused him by seeing him.  He may be \softline
damned for thievery, but his party will be victorious, while Dante's will be roundly defeated.\par
}}