{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 22}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}\sect \sectd \sbknone\margrsxn1296\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The similetic array of signals for troop movements in battle or for the start of a \softline
sporting event, a small catalogue of things and techniques domestic and foreign, is, we remember, \softline
Dante's way of responding by contraries ('I've never seen anything to equal this') to the demonic fart \softline
that concluded the last canto and ushered Dante off on his journey under the guidance of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 decuria}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Malacoda's squad, now under the control of Barbariccia.  Vv. 4-5 are generally taken to \softline
refer to the battle of Campaldino, in 1289.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.95.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This, even if it is not a 'true simile,' is the first of eleven canto-opening similes in the poem.  \softline
See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.1-18; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.1-27; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.1-6; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.1-12; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.1-12; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.1-9; \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.1-6; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII.1-12; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.1-9; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.1-15.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Prof. Kevin Brownlee, in a seminar at Dartmouth College in 1985, suggested that \softline
these verses and the atmosphere of the entire scene in XXI and XXII reflect some earmarks of the \softline
French }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fabliau}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : physical violence, proverbial remarks, animalistic traits, physically stronger \softline
characters being bested by cleverer weak ones.  For the farcical elements in these cantos see Leo \softline
Spitzer, "Speech and Language in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  19 (1942), pp. 77-104, and "The Farcical \softline
Elements in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Cantos XXI-XXIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  59 (1944), pp. 83-88.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The two similes describe the actions of the barrators in motion and at rest.  They \softline
only move to relieve their pain for a moment or to duck under the pitch (thus increasing their pain) \softline
in order to avoid a hooking by the devils -- a pain still more disturbing, as well as embarrassing.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It was apparently a current belief that dolphins approached ships when they sensed that a \softline
storm at sea was brewing.  See Chiavacci Leonardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Milan: Mondadori, 1991]), p. 658, for references in Brunetto Latini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tresor}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.134) and Jacopo \softline
Passavanti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lo Specchio della vera penitenza}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Florence, 1725, p. 257).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante claims to remember the names as they were called out by Malacoda (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXI.118-123 and note) and then repeated by various of the demons in the course of the action. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 48-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   About Ciampolo (for 'Gian Paolo,' prounounced 'Giampolo') we know nothing \softline
except what is furnished by the early commentators.  He is apparently from France and describes \softline
himself as a retainer of King Thibault II of Navarre (ca. 1250-70).  Ciampolo's is the first voice of a \softline
sinner we have heard since Nicholas III ceased speaking at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.87.  The interval is the longest \softline
of its kind in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  But see the similar long spell between }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.121 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.32.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 59-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Barbariccia, as leader of the troupe, intervenes to allow Virgil the opportunity for \softline
further questions.  Cir{\f3 \'56}atto had gored Ciampolo as he dangled from the end of Graffiacane's hook \softline
(vv. 55-57).  Now Barbariccia extends his long arms around the place where the pitchy sinner \softline
stands in order to ward off the others: he wants Ciampolo for himself.  (This view and our \softline
translation respect the readings of the details of this passage and of verse 123 in the Bosco/Reggio \softline
commentary to these verses). \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil wants to know, on behalf of Dante, whether there are other Italians in the \softline
pitch.  The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 latino}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , while it may of course mean 'Latin,' more frequently in Dante means 
'Italian,' as in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.xxviii.8, where Guido da Montefeltro is referred to as 'lo nobilissimo \softline
nostro latino' (the most noble of us Italians).  See also }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.58 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.92.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ciampolo says that he has come from one who hails from a place near Italy; as we shall \softline
learn (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.82), he speaks of Sardinia.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.xi.7, where Sardinians are \softline
spoken of in exactly these terms.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Two devils can barely be restrained; indeed, before Barbariccia once again asserts \softline
his authority, allowing Virgil yet another question, Libicocco succeeds in giving Ciampolo a second \softline
wound (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.55-57 for Cir{\f3 \'56}atto's earlier thrust into his flesh).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 81-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Fra Gomita was a jovial friar appointed ca. 1294 to serve Nino Visconti of Pisa as \softline
his deputy.  Some of the early commentators report that Nino would hear no complaint against his \softline
corrupt appointee, but that he eventually learned that he had allowed, for a fee, certain prisoners to \softline
escape.  At that point he immediately had Fra Gomita hanged.  For Nino see }{\plain \fs24 \f1 the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXXIII.1-3.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Michel Zanche was Governor of Logudoro, a district of Sardinia, but little is known of \softline
his actual career or misdeeds, and what is put forward in the early commentaries is now treated as \softline
dubious.  He was murdered by Branca d'Oria (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.137), who wanted to avail himself \softline
of Michel's ill-begotten gains.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again the conversation between Ciampolo and Virgil is interrupted by the \softline
devils' vicious sport, with order being maintained only by Barbariccia's firm insistence.  Domenico \softline
De Robertis has noted that the parallels between Ciampolo and the protagonist as objects of the \softline
devils' attention ("In viaggio coi dem{\f3 \'62}ni [canto XXII dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  53 [1981], p. \softline
3).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As crafty as his keepers, Ciampolo uses Dante and Virgil to set up his counter-measures, offering to bring to the surface barrators who will speak their language, Tuscans and \softline
Lombards (he has evidently caught the linguistic marks of their birthplaces in their accents.  Dante, \softline
of course, is variously recognized as a Tuscan from his speech, but it comes as something of a \softline
surprise when we discover Virgil actually speaking in Lombard dialect (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.20-21 and \softline
the note to XXVII.19-21).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The game Ciampolo devises involves the following ploys on his part and \softline
reactions by the Malebranche: (1) Ciampolo's cleverly indirect invitation to the devils to withdraw \softline
so as not to frighten off (putative) emergent Tuscans and Lombards whom he, sitting down to \softline
show his own apparent good faith, will whistle up if there are no devils visible; (2) Cagnazzo's \softline
understanding that this is a ruse; (3) Ciampolo's counter-move: 'But you must give them room.  Do \softline
you think }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 I}{\plain \fs24 \f1  would cause my fellow-sufferers still greater suffering?' [of course he would!]; (4) \softline
Alichino's being won over by Cagnazzo's wiles, mainly because he is so eager for a fight, whether \softline
Ciampolo is tricking them or not; he gets all his mates, even the suspicious Cagnazzo (and \softline
Barbariccia, we must surmise), to move down behind the ridge so as not to be visible from the pitch \softline
and challenges Ciampolo to try to escape him, if he dare; (5) Ciampolo's dive from the ridge as he 
makes good his escape.  The rhythm of this central action in Canto XXII parallels that in the \softline
previous canto, in which two observers have entirely different interpretations of the same \softline
phenomena.  Cagnazzo and Alichino here respectively play the parts of Dante and Virgil in the \softline
previous scene: Cagnazzo and Dante discern the motives of Ciampolo and the devils, respectively, \softline
while Alichino and Virgil do not.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab At v. 123 we have translated the noun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 proposto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as 'designs,' i.e., 'intention,' as \softline
Bosco/Reggio argue in their comment to this verse.  Their entire argument makes great sense, and \softline
is only made problematic by the fact that Dante had used the same noun at v. 94 (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.94) to \softline
indicate Barbariccia, the 'provost,' or leader, of the squad, which is how the majority of \softline
commentators understand it here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-144.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The postlude to Ciampolo's escape also is filled with action: (1) Alichino speeds \softline
after the Navarrese but cannot catch up with him; (2) Calcabrina takes out his rage on Alichino, \softline
whose gullibility led to the loss of their plaything; (3) they both fall into the pitch.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 145-150.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Barbariccia directs four of his band to fly across to the other side of the ditch as \softline
part of a rescue mission, while he and the remaining three extend their hooks from the top of the \softline
bank, which the ten had hidden behind, in a mutual effort to pull their fallen comrades from the \softline
gluey pitch.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 151.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil and Dante seize the occasion to escape.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 }\tab }