{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 21}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}\sect \sectd \sbknone\margrsxn1296\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   What is the subject under discussion as the travelers leave the fourth bridge and reach \softline
the midpoint of the fifth?  Most commentators simply avoid the issue, which probably must remain \softline
moot.  A few offer hypotheses about it, e.g., Benvenuto saying they discussed still other varieties of \softline
divination not touched upon in the examples they had examined (comm. to vv. 1-6), while Trucchi \softline
argues that the two poets are discussing their calumniators and their own good conscience, which \softline
defends them against such as these (comm. to vv. 1-6).  All one may reasonably conjecture is that \softline
the poet had no need to call attention to the subject under discussion if he did not want his reader \softline
to wonder about it.  However, no one has offered anything like a conclusive argument.  And \softline
Davide Conrieri is of the opinion that any such attempt must be considered a flight of critical fancy \softline
("Letture del canto XXI dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  158 [1981], pp. \softline
1-2).  But see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.104-105.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante's choice of title for his work caused some early commentators difficulty, but not all of \softline
them.  Guido da Pisa (comm. to vv. 1-2), for instance, nearly certainly echoing the Epistle to \softline
Cangrande, says that this work is a comedy because, like other comedies, it begins in misery and \softline
adversity and ends in prosperity and happiness (incipiunt a miseria et adversitate et finiunt in \softline
prosperitatem et felicitatem).  Others see only the stylistic reference of the term, as in the case of \softline
Benvenuto, for whom the title simply means 'my book in the vernacular' (meus liber vulgaris).  But \softline
others, like Francesco da Buti, allow that they are puzzled, wondering whether or not Dante should \softline
so have entitled it, but then allowing that it was his right to do whatever he chose: 'Sarebbe dubbio, \softline
se questo poema dell'autore si dee chiamare comedia o no; ma poi che li piacque chiamarla comedia \softline
debbalisi concedere.  Messer Francesco Petrarca in una sua epistola che comincia: Ne te laudasse \softline
poeniteat ec., muove questa questione e dice: Nec cur comoediam vocet video' (comm. to vv. 1-18) \softline
and see Luca Carlo Rossi, "Presenze di Petrarca in commenti danteschi fra tre e quattrocento," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aevum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  70 (1996), p. 462, for notice of this passage and its reference to the lost letter of Petrarch.  \softline
For a brief consideration of Dante's sense of tragedy and comedy see the concluding discussion in \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX.106-114.  On the question of the 'comic' in these cantos of devilish \softline
playfulness see Bernhard K{\f2\u246\'f6}nig, "Formen und Funktionen grober Komik bei Dante (zu}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXI-XXIII)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Deutsches Dante-Jahrbuch}{\plain \fs24 \f1  70 (1995), pp. 7-27.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Castelvetro (comm. to vv. 7-15) objects that Dante's wonderfully energetic simile is \softline
almost entirely made up of extraneous elements, i.e., he needed only to say that the pitch in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was as black as that in the arsenal at Venice.  Of course, that is the beauty of it, as Dante \softline
paints his scene as though he had seen the pictures of Breughel before they were painted.  Trucchi \softline
(comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.7-18) points out that the 'honest mercantilism' of the Venetians, with all its \softline
vitality, stands against the sordid conniving of barrators.  The pitch, the punishing agent of this \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , is the apt sign of the nature of barrators (whom we today call 'grafters'), working in secret \softline
and leaving such practitioners enlimed with its sticky sign, attaching to all who practice this kind of \softline
fraud.  'Barratry, the buying and selling of public office, is the civil equivalent of simony, the buying \softline
and selling of church office, the sin punished in the third }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' (Singleton, comm. to XXI.38).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Verse 11, 'chi fa suo legno novo,' is understood by nearly all the commentators to refer to \softline
the construction of new ships.  However, the entire context here involves the rebuilding of existent \softline
vessels; thus our translation has it that this phrase refers to making an old ship new.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Verse 16, insisting that what Dante records here is not, as is the aesthetically interesting 
arsenal of Venice, the result of human artisanship, but of God's own and particular craft, which is \softline
merely recorded -- not created (or so the 'official version' has it) by a human agent.  Even the \softline
darkness here is 'miraculous' -- see v. 6 -- as a result of that 'art.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 29.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This figure introduces the 'traditional medieval' devils of plays and festivals to the \softline
poem.  No other scenes in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  are as closely linked to the popular culture of the period as these \softline
in the cantos devoted to barratry.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 31-36) suggests that this figure, laden with what \softline
resembles a slaughtered corpse, reminds us of a butcher taking a carcass to be skinned and sold.  \softline
Christopher Kleinhenz has indicated another (and parodic) likely source: Christ as the Good \softline
Shepherd (the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastor bonus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the Bible and of medieval illustrations), holding a saved lamb on his \softline
shoulder.  See his "Iconographic Parody in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Res publica litterarum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  5 (1982),  pp. \softline
129-31.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The name of this class of devils, Malebranche, fits well the place, Malebolge, and \softline
means 'Evil Claws,' referring to their hooked hands, and perhaps to their forked prongs.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 38.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Elders of Lucca were the city's magistrates, similar in their governance to the \softline
Priors of Florence.  Zita was a young servant woman of the city, dead in the 1270's, to whom were \softline
reputed great kindness and numerous miracles.  While she was not canonized until 1690, she was \softline
reputed a saint shortly after her death, and her cult flourished around her tomb in the church of San \softline
Frediano in Lucca.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As for the identity of this nameless Lucchese, Guido da Pisa seems to have been the first \softline
commentator to say that he was Martino Bottario (or Bottai).  He seems to have shared political \softline
(and thus grafting) power with Bonturo Dati, mentioned in v. 41 (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.41).  There is another \softline
fact about him that is striking: he apparently died, according to Guido (comm. to this verse), on 26 \softline
March 1300, that is, at least in certain calculations, on the very day that is now unfolding in Dante's \softline
poem.  Francesco da Buti confirms his name and also registers the date of his death, now given as \softline
the Friday night before Holy Saturday (but only referring to the month of March, strangely, since \softline
Good Friday fell on 9 April in 1300).  Later commentators, if they refer to this material, all have the \softline
death date as occurring on 9 April, even though this is not authorized by the first commentators to \softline
claim that Martino is the Lucchese here present.  For particulars see Pietro Mazzamuto \softline
(ED.1970.1), pp. 313-14.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The notion that barrators come straight from earth to this point in hell, carried off by a \softline
devil, seems to violate the rule that all must cross Acheron with Charon (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.122-123) and then \softline
go before Minos to be judged (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.7-12).  Even the black Cherub who carries off the soul of \softline
Guido da Montefeltro is said (by Guido himself) to have carried him only as far as Minos (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVII.124).  Thus Singleton reasons (comm. to this verse) that the devil at least stops briefly at \softline
Minos's place of judgement in order to allow the formal sentencing to take place.  (Must we also \softline
imagine that he accompanies barrators from Lucca aboard Charon's skiff?)  It is surely true that \softline
Dante is generally precise in honoring the ground-rules that he establishes; it is also true that he has \softline
written a poem, one that allows him to please his fancy when he chooses.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 41-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bonturo Dati, who did not die until 1325, was famed for his barratry.  A popular \softline
tale has it that when Boniface VIII, embacing him at an encounter when Bonturo visited him on an \softline
embassy, shook him, Bonturo said, in return, 'You have just shaken half of Lucca' (meaning to \softline
indicate Martino as the other half).  Dante's devil's exclusion of him from among the Lucchesi who, \softline
suborned by money, will turn an Elder's 'no' into a 'yes' is indubitably ironic and sarcastic: no one in \softline
Lucca is a greater grafter than he.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 40-42) points out that Bonturo betrayed Lucca to the Pisans in \softline
1315 and that, therefore, this passage was written before that date or Dante would have consigned \softline
Bonturo to a future posting in Cocytus, among the treacherous.  However, as we must \softline
acknowledge, any such certainty about Dante's choice of the most fit punishment may be tentative \softline
at best.  E.g., why is Dido punished as a lover and not as a suicide?  (See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.61.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The ironic edge of the devils' remark is variously interpreted, depending on the \softline
meaning of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 convolto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Does this sinner return to the surface with his face now covered with pitch \softline
(in which case he resembles the ebony face of Christ on the much-venerated image of the \softline
Crucifixion in San Martino, in Lucca)? or is he bent in two, emerging with his backside from the \softline
pitch (in which case he looks like a citizen of Lucca kneeling to prostrate himself before the \softline
image)?  Strong arguments are made for each interpretation, and each is supported by a further text \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII. 25-28; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.19-24), in which the sinners in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  are compared, second to \softline
frogs with only their snouts out of water, first to dolphins showing their backs as they move \softline
through water.  Either meaning is completely possible, but most contemporary commentators prefer \softline
the latter, perhaps because it is the more burlesque.\par
}\sect \sectd \sbknone\margrsxn1260\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Nonetheless, it remains interesting that Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: \softline
Sansoni, 1934]), p. 273, supports reading }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 convolto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as 'covered up in' with the example of a text in \softline
Bono Giamboni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Orosio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , V.xix): 'Mario fuggendo... nelle paludi di Minturnese si nascose; della \softline
quali malavventuratamente }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 del fango tutto convolto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  tratto....'  See also Isidoro Del Lungo (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dal \softline
seculo e dal poema di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. II [Bologna: Zanichelli, 1898]), pp. 471-72, offering the \softline
following equivalences for the word: 'involto, ravviluppato, ravvolto, in materia sporca o \softline
appiccicosa.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Serchio is the river near Lucca in which citizens swam for refreshment in the days \softline
of summer.  That the devils address Martino would tend to support the notion that it is his head that \softline
has surfaced rather than his rump, i.e., they would seem to be saying 'Man, that's no way to do your \softline
imitation of the Holy Visage!'  Guido da Pisa thinks of a passage in the Bible (Deut. 32:20) in ways \softline
that might make his reader consider a parodic intent, if Dante were also thinking of it: 'Abscondam \softline
faciem meam ab eis' (And I shall hide my face from them).  The Mosaic text speaks, of course, of \softline
God's hiding his face from humankind.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-62.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's self-assurance will shortly be proven to have been ill-founded.  Here begins \softline
the longest episode in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; it will run through Canto XXIII.57, some 290 verses.  See \softline
Hollander, "Virgil and Dante as Mind-Readers (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI and XXIII)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9 \softline
(1984), pp. 85-86.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Some Renaissance commentators (e.g., Vellutello [comm. to vv. 61-63] and Daniello \softline
[comm. to vv. 58-63]) insist on the proximity of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 baratta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to barratry, which would indicate 
that the word is likely to indicate a previous scuffle with these very demons -- who certainly seem \softline
the types to have bothered Virgil on his descent to Cocytus when Erichtho sent him on his mission \softline
down there (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.22-27).  The first commentator in the DDP to try a different tack is Singleton \softline
(comm. to this verse): 'Virgil may be referring to his difficulties with the devils at the walls of Dis \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.82-130) or to some skirmish that he had with these devils on his previous journey to \softline
lower hell (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.22-30).  The first meaning seems more probable and\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 more significant, since Virgil appears to forget that his difficulties before Dis were solved not by \softline
himself but by a messenger from Heaven.  Hence Virgil here exhibits the same self-confidence he \softline
showed in the earlier encounter, before the devils shut the gate in his face.'  The fact that Virgil is \softline
shortly to be found out of his depth in his struggle with the Malebranche, again after exhibiting self-confidence in the face of hostile demons, strongly supports this reading.  It does not invalidate the \softline
understanding that Virgil has earlier had a set-to with these very demons, but may stand alongside \softline
it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's calm assurance is shredded by the attack of the 'dogs' who rush out upon \softline
him, a poor beggar.  The simile is hard on poor Virgil, who only barely manages to regain control of \softline
the situation, which, we remember, is being observed by Dante, squatting in hiding on the bridge.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The entry on the scene of Malacoda ('Eviltail'), the lead devil of the Malebranche of \softline
Malebolge, is perfectly in character, as we shall see.  He pretends to be servile, but mutters under \softline
his breath about his sense of Virgil's futility.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's aplomb, his 'high style' contrasting with demonic 'vernacular,' serves at once \softline
to set him apart from the 'low-life' devils and their leader, Malacoda, but also to make him seem \softline
slightly ridiculous, since Malacoda, not he, is eventually in control of the situation, as Virgil will \softline
only finally realize, to his considerable chagrin, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.140-141.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Does Virgil remember Malacoda from his last visit?  Or has he only repeated Malacoda's \softline
name because he has just now heard it from the other devils?  The plural 'your' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vostri}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) seems to be \softline
generalized and to refer to all and any demonic opposition that he and Dante have encountered so \softline
far in their journey, actually only once before, at the gates of Dis (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.115-120).  Virgil's \softline
phrasing at v. 82, combining references to the will of God and to the (pagan?) Fates, picks up his \softline
identical coupling of these two powers in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.94-97.  A Christian guide might have only \softline
used the first term. (Guido da Pisa, in his gloss to this passage, refers explicitly to the different \softline
ambiences of the two expressions, the first being 'theological,' the second, 'pagan' [comm. to vv. 79-82]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Virgil's reference in verse 83 to the fact that he is not alone ('Let }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 us}{\plain \fs24 \f1  proceed') for the first \softline
time alerts Malacoda and his cohort to Dante's hidden presence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Malacoda's fearful gesture, letting fall his billhook, is a masterful ploy that succeeds \softline
in getting Virgil to lower his guard.  See Sam Guyler, "Virgil the Hypocrite -- Almost: A Re-interpretation of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  90 (1972), p. 34.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil, tricked, orders Dante to leave his hiding-place.  The devils, sensing fresh \softline
meat, crowd forward.  Dante's fear is a more realistic response to the situation than is Virgil's self-assurance.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 95.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante was present at the successful siege of Caprona in 1289, a cavalryman observing \softline
the success of the mission of his Tuscan Guelphs against this Pisan stronghold.  It is to his lasting \softline
credit that what he remembers for us is how the victims must have felt when they came out under a \softline
pact of safe-conduct.  Dante, exiled on the charge of barratry by his fellow citizens, here perhaps \softline
means to remind them that he had borne arms on behalf of the republic in its victories, the siege of \softline
Caprona in August of 1289, and the previous great victory at Campaldino that June, referred to \softline
later in this scene (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.4-5).  He was not a grafter, scheming in the dark, but a cavalryman \softline
who did his deeds in the fearsome clarity of war.  There have been several attempts in the last two \softline
centuries to relate the scenes and personnages of these cantos of barratry to Dante's own \softline
experiences as accused barrator perfidiously sent into exile on this pretext (and thus presented as \softline
attacked by the twelve Priors of Florence, the Malebranche), and to his military experiences, offered \softline
as vindication against such malicious and untrue charges.  For cautionary remarks, urging restraint \softline
in such interpretation, see Conrieri ("Letture del canto XXI dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della \softline
letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  158 [1981]), pp. 38-39.  For perhaps the first attempt to claim that Dante had \softline
constructed a developed autobiographical 'political allegory' in this scene, see Rossetti{\u8219\'27}s \softline
introduction to his commentary on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's fears are justified; only Malacoda's intervention prevents the bullying \softline
devils from assaulting him with their hooks.  Malacoda holds back Scarmiglione, encouraging him \softline
to await a more propitious moment for his attack.  Scarmiglione is the first of the ten devils to be \softline
named.  He is apparently not included in the squad of ten put under Barbariccia's control -- see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.118-123.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Malacoda's partial truth (the sixth bridge, over the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of hypocrisy, is in ruins) \softline
is quickly joined to a total lie (the next bridge along their route is intact).  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 All}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the bridges are down, \softline
as Virgil will be told by Fra Catalano in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.133-138.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This extraordinarily precise time reference is the most certain text in the poem for \softline
establishing an external date for the journey.  It is 7am of Holy Saturday, since Christ, according to \softline
Dante (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.xxiii.10), died at noon.  In fact Dante here is modifying the facts, if on the \softline
authority of Luke (Luke 23:44), who gives the time of the preternatural darkness as noon.  Even \softline
Luke, however, is clear that Jesus died at 3pm.  Dante is willing to rewrite any text to suit his \softline
purpose.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab From this passage we learn that the events narrated in this poem occurred in Easter week of \softline
1300.  However, and as we have seen, Dante seems to be conflating two dates for the start of the \softline
journey, each of which is propitious, 25 March and 8 April (the actual date of Good Friday in 1300) \softline
in order to gain the maximum significant referentiality.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.1.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Malacoda lies yet again, promising safe-conduct.  Once again Virgil is trusting, \softline
Dante not.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}\sect \sectd \sbknone\marglsxn1350\margrsxn1260\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's pleasure in developing }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nomi parlanti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (names that bespeak the quality of \softline
their possessors) is evident here.  His playful naming is based on the aggressive bestial characteristics \softline
of these creatures (for some possible 'translations' into English of their names, see the commentary of \softline
Durling and Martinez [New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996], p. 330).  For the 
possible Old French sources of his onomastic behavior see Picone, "Baratteria e stile comico in \softline
Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Americani su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. G. C. Alessio e R. Hollander (Milan: Franco Angeli, 1989), \softline
pp. 76-81.\par
}\sect \sectd \sbknone\margrsxn1260\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante's thoroughness and care in his handling of the demons' names is underlined by the fact \softline
that each of the ten members of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 decina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 decuria,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the Latin military term for a 'squad' of ten \softline
troopers) is named exactly once in the following canto, as follows (with John Sinclair's English \softline
approximations of some of these names in parentheses): Barbariccia (Curlybeard -- XXII.29), \softline
Graffiacane (Scratchdog -- 34), Rubicante (Redface -- 40), Cir{\f3 \'56}atto (Swineface -- 55), Libicocco \softline
(70), Dragignazzo (Vile Dragon -- 73), Farfarello (94), Cagnazzo (Low hound -- 106), Alichino \softline
(112), and Calcabrina (133).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 125-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Malacoda lies again: the devils understand that they are to take Dante and Virgil \softline
by surprise, attacking Dante later on.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's pleas to Virgil will fall on deaf ears, but we sense already (and will shortly \softline
have confirmed) that he, not his guide, understands what the devils are up to.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's response to Dante's question, based on correct observation and resultant \softline
correct interpretation of the devils' true motives, marks yet another moment in this canto in which \softline
the reader is nearly forced to observe how harshly the guide is being treated by the author.  In \softline
recent years there has been an increasing acknowledgment of what should have been clear to any \softline
reader who is willing to give over the notion that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is essentially an 'allegorical' poem in \softline
which the character Virgil represents 'Reason.'  See, among others, Ricardo Bacchelli, "Da Dite a \softline
Malebolge: la tragedia delle porte chiuse e la farsa dei ponti rotti," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della \softline
letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  131 (1954), pp. 1-32; C.J. Ryan, "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI: Virgil and Dante: A Study in \softline
Contrasts," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  59 (1982), pp. 16-31; Hollander, "Virgil and Dante as Mind-Readers (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXI and XXIII)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9 (1984), pp. 85-100.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136-139.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The devils either prepare to make or have already made a farting sound with their \softline
tongues stuck through their teeth in answer to Malcoda's prior 'war-signal' of a fart.  See Sarolli's \softline
appreciation of this low-mimetic scene as part of the tradition of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 musica diaboli}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the hellish music \softline
that stands in total contrast with the heavenly music we shall hear in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see Gian Roberto \softline
Sarolli, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Prolegomena alla "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1971], pp. 5n., 363-80).  The \softline
perverse devils turn their mouths into anuses in preparing to answer Malacoda's (and he is surely \softline
aptly named in light of this sound) turning his anus into a bugle, the gestures constituting a sign of \softline
'understanding among the malefactors and a sign of their derision for Virgil's self-confident \softline
misreading of their intentions' (Hollander, "Virgil and Dante as Mind-Readers [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI and \softline
XXIII]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9 [1984], p. 90).\par
}}