{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 27}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-2.}{\plain \fs24   Ulysses' speech ends, his tongue of fire erect (i.e., not waving about [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.85-89]) and stilled.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 3.}{\plain \fs24   This innocent detail -- Virgil's dismissal of Ulysses -- will resurface at v. 21 with the \softline
addition of rather striking information about the language of Virgil's last words to Ulysses, uttered \softline
but not recorded here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 4-6.}{\plain \fs24   The next flame-enclosed shade, who will turn out to be a modern-day Ulysses, Guido \softline
da Montefeltro, was well known enough that he never has to be identified in more than indirect \softline
ways (vv. 67-78).  Born ca. 1220, Guido was one of the great Ghibelline captains of the last third \softline
of the thirteenth century, winning a number of important victories for the nonetheless eventually \softline
unsuccessful Ghibelline cause.  He was reconciled to the Church in 1286, but then took up his \softline
soldiering against the Guelphs once again, finally desisting only in 1294.  In 1296 he joined the \softline
Franciscan order (v. 67).  However, in the following year Pope Boniface VIII cajoled him into re-entering the world of military affairs, this time working against the Ghibellines (the Colonna \softline
family, which held the fortress of Palestrina, Roman Praeneste, as detailed in the text [vv. 85-111]).  Guido died in 1298 in the Franciscan monastery at Assisi.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab While other pairs of preceding cantos contain those who had committed the same sin (VII-VIII [the wrathful]; X-XI [heretics]; XV-XVI [sodomites]; XXIV-XXV [thieves]), only XXVI \softline
and XXVII treat two major figures guilty of the same sin, perhaps suggesting how closely Guido \softline
and Ulysses are related in Dante's imagination.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 7-15.}{\plain \fs24   This simile is derived either from various histories (Pietro di Dante mentions \softline
Orosius and Valerius Maximus [Pietro1, comm. to vv. 7-12]) or from Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i Ars amatoria}{\plain \fs24  I.653-656).  The ancient tyrant of Agrigento (in Sicily), Phalaris, had the Athenian Perillus construct for \softline
him a brazen bull in which he could roast his victims alive.  Their screams were transformed into \softline
what resembled the bellowings of a bull.  Once the instrument of torture was finished, Phalaris \softline
ordered that Perillus be its first victim, thus testing his handicraft.  It worked.  Ovid's moral to the \softline
story (}{\plain \fs24 \i Ars amatoria}{\plain \fs24  I.655-656) seems to be echoed in Dante's verse 8: 'there is no law more just \softline
than that the craftsman of death should die by his own handicraft.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For studies of this simile see Richard Lansing ("Submerged Meanings in Dante's Similes \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  94 [1976], pp. 61-69) and William Cook and Ronald Herzman ("St. \softline
Eustace: A Note on }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXVII," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  96 [1976], pp. 137-39), the latter pointing to \softline
an inverse parallel, found in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Golden Legend}{\plain \fs24 , to the martyred St. Eustace.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 16-18.}{\plain \fs24   These verses make clear for the first time how the mechanics of speech of the \softline
fraudulent counselors work; their words are formed by their tongues, within their fires, and then \softline
produced by the tips of their flames.  When Guido first appeared (v. 6) he was apparently only \softline
mumbling about his pain within his flame.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-21.}{\plain \fs24   Guido's address to Virgil not only insists that the Roman poet was speaking his \softline
(native -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.68) Lombard, i.e., north Italian, dialect, but then offers in evidence his exact \softline
words.  What are we to understand about the language in which Virgil first addressed Ulysses 
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.72-75)?  Was it the same as this?  Or is this, as seems more likely, the colloquial \softline
manner in which he sends him away?  The entire problem has vexed many a commentator, and no \softline
simple resolution has as yet emerged.  Now see Francesco Bruni ("}{\plain \fs24 \i Istra}{\plain \fs24 : una falsa ricostruzione \softline
dantesca?" in }{\plain \fs24 \i Omaggio a Gianfranco Folena}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Pier Vincenzo Mengaldo [Padua: Editoriale \softline
Programma, 1993], pp. 419-28) on the problems associated with finding any attested presence of \softline
the term, in this form, in Dante's Italy and the possibility that it is a Dantean coinage.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 25-27.}{\plain \fs24   Perhaps because he cannot see clearly from within his flame, Guido cannot tell \softline
whether Virgil (or Dante, for that matter) is a living soul or a dead fellow-sinner, just now come \softline
down from Italy to spend eternity here.  The reason for Dante's insistence on this detail will be \softline
made plain when Guido reveals himself only because he does not believe that Dante will ever \softline
resurface to tell his miserable story.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28.}{\plain \fs24   When Guido died (1298) the peace in Romagna had not yet been confirmed, as it was \softline
the following year (see Torraca{\u8219\'27}s comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.39).  The region of Romagna is situated in \softline
the eastern north-central part of Italy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 33.}{\plain \fs24   Not only is Guido an Italian (}{\plain \fs24 \i latino}{\plain \fs24 ), he is that Italian whom Dante had designated as \softline
most noble (}{\plain \fs24 \i lo nobilissimo nostro latino}{\plain \fs24 ) in }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24  IV.xxviii.8.  Commentators have been \softline
concerned about this apparent contradiction; for an attempt to mitigate it see Lino Pertile, \softline
"}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXVII.  Il peccato di Guido da Montefeltro," }{\plain \fs24 \i Atti dell'Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere \softline
ed Arti}{\plain \fs24  141 (1982-83), pp. 171-75.  If, however, Dante had changed his mind about a number of \softline
his positions in }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24 , as others believe, there is no reason to find the contradiction anything \softline
less than intentional.  Further, he may not have known of Guido's involvement with Boniface \softline
when he wrote the passage praising him in }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24 .  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXVII.106-111.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Virgil's passing the questioning of Guido (a modern) over to Dante reminds us of his \softline
insisting on it for Ulysses (an ancient) in the previous canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.73-75).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 37-39.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's reference to Romagna answers Guido's first question: there is peace -- of a \softline
sort -- there now.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 40-54.}{\plain \fs24   Dante now enlightens Guido (and only an expert in the political and geographical \softline
lore of the region would understand his elliptical speech) about the condition of eight cities and \softline
fortified towns of Romagna, governed by various tyrants: Ravenna, Cervia, Forl{\f2 \'58}, Verrucchio, \softline
Rimini, Faenza, Imola, and Cesena.  Guido had been in military action in many of them, with \softline
mixed results.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 55-57.}{\plain \fs24   Having answered some of Guido's concerns (whom he as yet does not recognize), \softline
Dante asks for a similar favor, offering fame in the world as a reward.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 61-66.}{\plain \fs24   Guido's response, made familiar to English readers by T. S. Eliot as the epigraph \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock}{\plain \fs24 , makes it clear that, for him, report among the living \softline
would bring infamy, not fame.  Since he believes that Dante is a damned soul, and thus unable to \softline
regain the world of the living, he will speak.  For the ingenious argument that Guido knows that \softline
Dante is alive, only feigning that he does not in order to concoct a self-favoring narrative that 
Dante will carry back to the world, see Joseph Markulin ("Dante's Guido da Montefeltro: A \softline
Reconsideration," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  100 [1982], pp. 25-40).  The first view seems unlikely, because \softline
the poet spends so much time with the details of Guido's lack of knowledge of Dante's condition; \softline
the second, because the tale he tells is in fact damning enough.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 67.}{\plain \fs24   Guido sums up his life in a single line: he went from bad to good.  In fact, he went \softline
from bad to good to bad again.  Dante may have reflected that his own life was exactly the \softline
opposite in its movements, from good to bad, but then from bad to good.  Guido did not have a \softline
Beatrice to lead him back to the true path, only a Boniface.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 70-72.}{\plain \fs24   Boniface VIII, according to Guido, led him from his life of religious retreat back \softline
into political machinations.  Like Francesca da Rimini, Guido da Montefeltro blames his fall upon \softline
another; like her he will tell Dante the reasons for it (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.119, where Dante asks Francesca \softline
to tell 'a che e come' (how and by what signs) she came into Love's power; Guido will tell Dante 'e \softline
come e }{\plain \fs24 \i quare}{\plain \fs24 ' [Latin 'why,' more precisely 'in what respect'] (how and why) the reasons for his fall \softline
into perdition.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 75.}{\plain \fs24   According to contemporary documents, Guido was actually referred to as 'the fox.'  \softline
His quality of }{\plain \fs24 \i astutia}{\plain \fs24 , or 'cunning,' further identifies him with Ulysses (see the note to  }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXVI.58-63).  For }{\plain \fs24 \i astutia}{\plain \fs24  as an attribute of Guido{\u8219\'27}s personality, see Lino Pertile, "}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  \softline
XXVII.  Il peccato di Guido da Montefeltro," }{\plain \fs24 \i Atti dell'Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti}{\plain \fs24  \softline
141 (1982-83), pp. 166-70.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 79-81.}{\plain \fs24   Guido's nautical metaphors clearly relate him, perhaps more plainly than before, to \softline
Ulysses.  For the curious notice on the part of Filippo Villani (in his life of Guido Bonatti) that \softline
Guido da Montefeltro was 'full of all cunning [}{\plain \fs24 \i astutia}{\plain \fs24 ]' and that he was known among the Italians \softline
as 'the new Ulysses' see Hollander ("The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24  [Ravenna: Longo, 1980]), p. 142.  This would suggest either that, in Dante's day, Guido \softline
was actually referred to in this way, or that Filippo, an impassioned reader of Dante, is freely \softline
interpreting the reason for the juxtaposition of these two great figures in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 82-84.}{\plain \fs24   Guido speaks of his contrition, confession, and satisfaction as though they were \softline
the merest of conveniences to attain an end.  Do we believe, on the strength of this account, that \softline
he had actually fooled God?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 85-93.}{\plain \fs24   Guido's vicious slam of Boniface, with its concomitant enthusiasm for the \softline
abandoned devotion to crusading, is not in any respect at odds with Dante's own thoughts.  \softline
Boniface is attacking Palestrina and its Christian inhabitants, none of whom had joined the \softline
Saracens in their re-taking of Acre in 1291, until then the only remaining Christian possession in \softline
the Holy Land, or gone there only to do business with the enemy.  Instead of attacking the infidel \softline
(or back-sliding Christians) he moves against his co-religionists.  For a quite different view, one \softline
which holds that Dante was in fact critical of earlier papal exhortations to engage in crusading, see \softline
Brenda Deen Schildgen, "Dante and the Crusades," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  116 (1998), pp. 95-125.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Boniface cares nothing for Christians, according to Guido (and Dante).  Not only does he \softline
not oppose the heathen in order to make war on his own, he does not honor his own holy orders, 
nor those of Guido the friar.  The use of the term }{\plain \fs24 \i capestro}{\plain \fs24  (cord) here has implications for those \softline
who believe that the }{\plain \fs24 \i corda}{\plain \fs24  at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XVI.106 is a reference to Dante's status as a Franciscan.  \softline
(See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVI.106-108.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 94-97.}{\plain \fs24   In the fourth century Constantine, suffering from leprosy, had Pope Sylvester I \softline
brought to him from his cave on Soracte (where he was in hiding because of Constantine's \softline
persecution of Christians) to cure him.  When the pontiff did so, Constantine converted to \softline
Christianity (and ended up in paradise, according to Dante [}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XX.55-60]); but he also out of \softline
gratitude gave Sylvester authority over the western empire, centered in the city of Rome.  (See \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.115-117.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 102.}{\plain \fs24   Penestrino is modern Palestrina and was ancient Praeneste.  The Colonna family \softline
were in rebellion against Boniface's authority and had defended themselves in this fortress.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 103-105.}{\plain \fs24   Boniface's claim is utterly false, as Guido will learn.  His reference to Celestine \softline
V here makes it seem all the more likely that it is he who is referred to in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  III.59-60 (see \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.58-60).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 106-111.}{\plain \fs24   Silence as a defensive weapon against this pope was probably the only way out; \softline
but his imposing insistence was too much for Guido, and he makes his bargain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab A continuing debate follows verse 110.  Did Dante read these words in chroniclers who \softline
preceded him (e.g., Riccobaldo of Ferrara, Francesco Pipino of Bologna, both of whom wrote \softline
before 1313, if we are not sure exactly when), or did they get them from Dante?  For the key texts \softline
in the dispute see Singleton (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.67).  Some contemporary commentators (e.g., \softline
Bosco, introductory note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII) favor the precedence of Riccobaldo's chronicle, perhaps \softline
written between 1308 and 1313, and believe that Dante's account (and revision of his former \softline
positive view of Guido) derive from it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 112-114.}{\plain \fs24   Markulin ("Dante's Guido da Montefeltro: A Reconsideration," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  \softline
100 [1982], pp. 25-40) considers the possibility that Guido has invented the battle between St. \softline
Francis and the black Cherub (a member of the second highest rank of angels, associated with \softline
knowledge).  Discomfort with the scene has been abroad for a while.  Castelvetro (comm. to \softline
verse 114) did not hide his annoyance, seeing that Dante had portrayed the soul of Francis as \softline
having made an error in thinking that Guido was to be saved and thus could not possibly have \softline
been sent from heaven by God (and was consequently wasting his time), for which reasons he \softline
criticizes Dante for not speaking with greater reverence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Guido's son Bonconte will be caught up in a similar struggle between devil and angel, with \softline
the angel winning (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . V.104-105).  Such a scene may find justification in medieval \softline
popularizing art, but Castelvetro is right to complain about its theological absurdities.  On the \softline
other hand, Dante is writing a poem and not a treatise.  That he repeats the motif would seem to \softline
indicate that we are meant to take it 'seriously.'  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIII.131.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 116.}{\plain \fs24   Perhaps the most discussed issue in these two neighboring cantos is developed from \softline
this verse.  What precisely is 'fraudulent advice' (}{\plain \fs24 \i consiglio frodolente}{\plain \fs24 )?  Is it the sin that condemns \softline
Guido?  Is Ulysses, in the previous canto, condemned for the same sin?  Fraudulent counsel is 
giving someone evil advice (whether or not it is effective advice) or acting in such fraudulent ways \softline
as to lead others into harming themselves.  Since Virgil leaves the sins of the eighth and ninth \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24  unnamed (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XI.52-60 and note), this is the only indication we have for a clear \softline
determination of the sin punished in these two cantos.  Any other solution seems less satisfactory, \softline
if there have been many who have been eager to try to find one.  The American debate in the last \softline
century was initiated by Anna Hatcher's claim ("Dante's Ulysses and Guido da Montefeltro," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  88 [1970], pp. 109-17) that Guido's sin was not false counsel; her view was \softline
countered by James G. Truscott ("Ulysses and Guido," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  91 [1973], pp. 47-72), but \softline
then affirmed by Markulin ("Dante's Guido da Montefeltro: A Reconsideration," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  \softline
100 [1982], pp. 25-40).  As the reader has noted, debates about the nature of the precise sins \softline
referred to in various passages (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VII, XI, XV [see discussions at the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
VII.118-126; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XI.76-90; and }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XV.13-21]) are a fairly frequent feature of Dante studies and \softline
often involve considerable ingenuity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 118-120.}{\plain \fs24   While Dante, in }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24  III.xiii.2, clearly states that fallen angels cannot \softline
philosophize, since love is a basic requirement of true philosophizing and they are without love, it \softline
is clear that they can use logic, one of the tools of philosophy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 124.}{\plain \fs24   This fallen angel does the 'right thing' and stops his descent with his victim at Minos.  \softline
See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXI.39.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 128-132.}{\plain \fs24   Unlike Ulysses, who ends his speech with a certain majesty, Guido insists upon \softline
his bitterness, realizing eternally his foolishness in his having given over his chance for love and \softline
salvation when he did the bidding of Boniface.  The canto opens with Ulysses' flame calm and \softline
steady (vv. 1-2) and ends with that of Guido writhing.\par
}}