{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Œ×;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}{\f4\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Œ× CE;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 28}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-6.}{\plain \fs24   For Dante's disclaimer of the ability to describe the blood and wounds that surpass \softline
both words and memory (even were he to revert to prose to do so) see Virgil's similar disclaimer \softline
in (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . VI.625-627): 'And if I had a hundred tongues and as many mouths, along with a voice of \softline
iron, I could not put together all the shapes of crime nor run through all the catalogue of \softline
torments.'  The passage was first cited by Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to XXVIII.1-3) and is \softline
now a commonplace in the commentaries.  It is remembered probably even more evidently at \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24  XXIII.55-59, as was perhaps first noted by Tommaseo (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XXIII.55-57).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 7-21.}{\plain \fs24   This elliptical version of a simile, so rich in its catalogue of the horrors of war, \softline
involves four battles (or series of battles), two of them ancient, two modern, roughly as follows:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 500 BC ca.\ul0 \tab Aeneas's Trojans triumph in south and central Italy;\par
}{\plain \fs24 216 BC\ul0 \tab Romans are defeated by the Carthaginians at Cannae;\par
}{\plain \fs24 1170 ca.\ul0 \tab Robert Guiscard's Normans defeat the Saracens;\par
}{\plain \fs24 1266 & 1268\ul0 \tab Manfred and then Conradin are defeated by Charles of Anjou.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 In this series of military actions the Roman and/or imperial side first wins, then loses disastrously.  \softline
The intrinsic view of history here is more chaotic than directed.  Absent is Dante's more optimistic \softline
view of history unfolding as a Roman and Christian manifestation of the spirit moving through \softline
history to its appointed goal (if this sounds like Hegel, it is meant to).  And we might further \softline
reflect that winning and losing battles has little to do with one's final destination in God's plan: \softline
Aeneas wins, but is in Limbo (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.122), Robert Guiscard wins and is in heaven (}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XVIII.48), Manfred loses and is on his way to heaven (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . III.112).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For Dante's relation to martial epic, a genre surely drawn to our attention by these scenes \softline
of war, see Hollander ("Dante and the Martial Epic," }{\plain \fs24 \i Mediaevalia}{\plain \fs24  12 [1989]), pp. 62-91 (tr. ital. \softline
"Dante e l}{\plain \fs24 \f1 '}{\plain \fs24 epopea marziale," }{\plain \fs24 \i Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24  18 [1989], pp. 93-113). }{\plain \fs24 \f1  And for the related \softline
question of Dante's relationship to Guittone d'Arezzo as 'epic poet' (as well as rival in love lyric), \softline
see the essays by Gorni, Antonelli, and Mazzoni in }{\plain \fs24 \i Guittone d'Arezzo nel settimo centenario della \softline
morte: Atti del Convegno Internazionale di Arezzo (22-24 aprile 1994)}{\plain \fs24 , ed. M. Picone (Florence: \softline
Franco Cesati, 1995), pp. 307-83}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; see also Teodolinda Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 "Guittone's }{\plain \fs24 \i Ora parr{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 , Dante's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Doglia mi reca}{\plain \fs24 , and the }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 's Anatomy of Desire," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Seminario Dantesco Internazionale: \softline
Atti del primo convegno tenutosi al Chauncey Conference Center, Princeton, 21-23 ottobre \softline
1994}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Z. G. Baranski [Florence: Le Lettere, 1997], pp. 3-23}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(II.ii.7-8) Dante had listed only Bertran de Born (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII.130-138) as a poet \softline
of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 salus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or 'arms,' that is, a writer of 'epic.'  Since his presence is so amply felt in this canto, \softline
starting with these lines, a redoing of the opening of Bertran's canzone 'Si tuit li dol,' as a number \softline
of twentieth-century commentators have observed, we may surmise that Dante here, possibly for \softline
the first time, thinks of the epic resonance of his own poem.  And while he seems to present \softline
martial epic as essentially the expression of the brutality of war, in the mode of Bertran, the fact \softline
that his poem here involves itself in the matter of martial epic may have made him feel that he \softline
himself had some title as a practitioner in this mode, where in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari}{\plain \fs24 \f1  he was himself obviously \softline
not at all interested in it (there he presented himself as a 'poet of rectitude,' not of 'arms').  Mario \softline
Fubini (}{\plain \fs24 "}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 : canto XXVIII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 , dir. Mario Marcazzan [Florence: 
Le Monnier, 1967 (1962)], pp. 999-1021}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) refers to this as the 'canto delle armi' in which Dante \softline
becomes 'il Bertram italiano' (p. 1005).  A countering view is presented by Mazzotta (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante's \softline
Vision and the Circle of Knowledge}{\plain \fs24  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ], pp. 75-95), \softline
who sees this canto as Dante's 'farewell to arms.'  Once could argue that, since Dante had never \softline
done poetry of a martial kind before, this is more like his 'hello.'  Many years ago the director Sam \softline
Peckinpaugh was asked in an interview on television why there was so much insistent, close-up, \softline
slow-motion depiction of violence in his film }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Wild Bunch}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  He replied that by so presenting it \softline
he had hoped to repel his audience, instilling in them a great dislike of such anti-social activity.  \softline
Bill Russell, the Boston Celtics star center at the time, his interlocutor, was convincingly dubious \softline
both as to the intended effect and to the motives of Mr. Peckinpaugh.  While Dante's position here \softline
would also seem to look down on 'mere' martial epic, with all its pointless slaughter, he \softline
nonetheless reveals an aptitude for the genre.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 9-11.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Puglia (Apulia) here, most commentators agree, is meant in its wider sense, i.e., not \softline
only the southeast portion of the Italian peninsula, but the region including Lazio.  The Trojans \softline
are then Aeneas and his men (some believe the reference is to the later Romans).  The 'long war' is \softline
the second Punic War (218-201 B.C.), during which the Romans suffered a terrible defeat at the \softline
hands of Hannibal's Carthaginian forces at Cannae (216 B.C.) in Apulia.  Historians relate that \softline
after the battle a Carthaginian envoy showed the Roman senate the vast number of gold rings \softline
taken from the fingers of noble Romans killed in the battle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The problem of the extent of Dante's knowledge of Livy remains a vexed one.  See \softline
Antonio Martina, 'Livio, Tito' (ED.1971.3), for a summary and bibliography through 1965 \softline
(especially important are the studies of Giuseppe Billanovich).  Commentators point out that \softline
Dante here would rather seem to be following Orosius (or Augustine) than Livy, but still appeals \softline
to Livy as the most authoritative historian of Rome.  His vast compendium, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ab urbe condita}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , did \softline
not come through the ages intact; precisely which parts of it were known to Dante is not known \softline
to us.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-14.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Robert Guiscard, a Norman, won many victories in Puglia ca. 1160-80 to \softline
consolidate his power as duke of the region, including what for Dante was the most important \softline
one, that over the Saracens, which apparently gained him his place in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.48.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 15-16.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The text alludes to Manfred's disastrous loss, occasioned, in Dante's view, by the \softline
betrayal of his Apulian allies, at the battle near Ceperano that was prologue to his final defeat and \softline
death at the hands of the forces of the French king Charles of Valois at the battle of Benevento \softline
(1266).  Manfred is the first saved soul found once Dante begins his ascent of the mount of \softline
purgatory (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.112).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 17-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Two years after the defeat at Benevento, the Ghibelline Norman forces, now under \softline
Conradin, the grandson of the emperor Frederick II, suffered their final defeat near Tagliacozzo, \softline
in the Abruzzi, again at the hands of the forces of Charles of Anjou, who, after the battle, had \softline
Conradin put to death, thus ending the Angevin succession in Italy.  Alardo was the French knight \softline
{\f4\u201\'c9}rard de Val{\f4\u233\'e9}ry, who gave Charles the strategic advice that gained him military advantage on the \softline
field.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This image, suggesting layers of excavated battlefields, each containing vast areas \softline
of wounded soldiers holding out their mutilated limbs, gives us some sense of Dante's view of the \softline
end result of war, sheer human butchery.  Bosco/Reggio (comm. to XXVIII.1-21) suggest that \softline
this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  brings into mind the image of a huge slaughterhouse.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the Virgilian resonance (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.361-362) of these lines see, again, Tommaseo (comm. \softline
to these vv.).  This is Aeneas's response when he must tell the terrible carnage during the night of \softline
the fall of Troy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-31.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This disgusting image of Mohammed derives from Dante's conviction that the \softline
prophet was in fact a Christian whose schismatic behavior took the form of founding (in 630) \softline
what Dante considered a rival sect rather than a new religion, Islam.  Thus Mohammed reveals \softline
himself as divided in two.  For the earliest (and varied) responses to the presence of Mohammed \softline
in the poem, see Paola Locatin, "Maometto negli antichi commenti alla }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L{\u8219\'27}Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
20 (2002), pp. 41-75.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 32-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Al{\f3 \'58}, disciple, cousin, and son-in-law of Mohammed, became the fourth leader of \softline
the Muslims.  But the issues surrounding his succession in 656 divided them into two factions, \softline
Sunni and Shiite, that continue to this day.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 35.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   All punished here are described by this verse.  'Scandal,' in this sense, means a \softline
promulgated doctrine that leads others to stumble and lose their way to the truth.  See Thomas \softline
Aquinas, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Summa theologica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II-II, q. 43, a. 1, resp., on the Greek word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 skandalon}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or 'stumbling-block.'  Thus all here either cause schism in others or themselves lead schismatic groups, the first \softline
three religious (Mohammed, Al{\f3 \'58}, Fra Dolcino), the last five political (Pier da Medicina, \softline
Malatestino, Curio, Mosca, Bertran de Born).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-40.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The unseen devil of this ditch joins the cast of devils of the Malebolge, the \softline
whippers of the first }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and the hookers of the fifth.  In this case there seems to be one devil \softline
alone, perhaps intended to remind the reader of the solitary Cherub, with flaming sword, sent to \softline
guard the Garden after Adam and Eve had been ejected from it (Genesis 3:24).  (See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VIII.25-27, where this passage is more clearly alluded to.)  It is only in Malebolge that we find \softline
such creatures.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Mohammed evidently believes that Dante is one of the dead sinners.  But how or \softline
why he thinks that such as they can loiter in hell, doing a bit of sightseeing before they go to \softline
judgment, is not easily explained.  Virgil's response (v. 49) makes it clear that only he, in this pair \softline
of visitors, is a dead soul.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Disabused of his erring view, Mohammed uses the occasion to send a message to \softline
his fellow in religious schism, Fra Dolcino.  A northerner, from Novara (balancing the southern \softline
setting of the opening of the canto), Dolcino Tornielli was the head, from ca. 1300, of a group \softline
known as the Apostolic Brethren (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gli Apostolici}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  This 'order' had as its aim the restoration of the \softline
simplicity of apostolic times to the Christian religion.  Its enemies accused Dolcino of holding \softline
heretical ideas, such as the community of goods and women (see Oelsner, comm. to these verses).  \softline
It did not help Dolcino's case that he was accompanied by a beautiful woman, Margaret of Trent, 
reputed to be his mistress.  Pope Clement V preached a crusade against the Brethren in 1305.  In \softline
1307, starved out by their enemies in the high country to which they had retreated, the Brethren \softline
were captured.  Margaret and Dolcino were burned at the stake.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Mohammed's placement of his suspended foot is read by some as a mere 'realistic \softline
detail.'  Rasha Al-Sabah (}{\plain \fs24 "}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXVIII: The Figure of Muhammad," }{\plain \fs24 \i Yale Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24  1 \softline
[1977], pp. 147-61}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) argues for an iconographic reading, based in a passage in St. Thomas on a \softline
passage in Proverbs (6:12-19), in which 'a wicked man with lying mouth, sewing discord,' has 'feet \softline
that are swift in running to mischief.'  His posture, one foot suspended, may also refer to the \softline
Greek term (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 skandalon}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) for 'stumbling-block,' found at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.35.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 65.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This bloodied figure, thus sliced by the sword-wielding devil, will be revealed as Pier \softline
da Medicina at v. 73.  For the reminiscence of Virgil's description of the disfigured visage of \softline
Deiphobus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.494-497), similarly deprived of his nose, see Scartazzini (comm. to \softline
XXVIII.64) and many later commentators.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 68.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Pier opens his windpipe to speak, since the devil's cut had wounded him there, thus \softline
preventing his breath from reaching his mouth.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The early commentators are not sure exactly who Pier of Medicina (a town \softline
between Bologna and Imola) was, but Dante and he apparently knew one another.  While the \softline
nature of his schismatic behavior thus lies in shadow, the fact that his ensuing remarks refer to \softline
political intrigue would seem to mark him also as a political, rather than a religious, schismatic.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab On verses 74-75 see Ignazio Baldelli, }{\plain \fs24 "'Lo dolce piano che da Vercelli a Marcab{\f3 \'62} dichina': \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXVIII, 74-75," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24  47 (1995), pp. 193-202.}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Pier refers, in his prophecy, which parallels that given by Mohammed, initially to \softline
two victims of 'schism,' Guido del Cassero and Angiolello di Carignano, first identified by \softline
Guiniforto in 1440 (comm. to XXVIII.76-84), and then to the victimizer, Malatestino Malatesta, \softline
lord of Rimini.  (He is referred to as 'the younger mastiff' in the last canto at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.46.)  The \softline
details are not known to any commentators, but apparently Dante knew that these two leaders of \softline
the city of Fano were tricked by Malatestino into coming to confer with him at the town of La \softline
Cattolica.  His men caught them in their ship on their way (or after they left) and drowned them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The passage has caused some dispute.  Malatestino only came into.power in Rimini after \softline
the death of his father in 1312.  This fact causes such as Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 "Intorno alla pubblicazione \softline
dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  e del }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivium}{\plain \fs24  25 [1957],}{\plain \fs24 \f1  pp. 659-60) to argue that this is a second \softline
example of Dante's posterior revision of the text of the first }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.79-87).  However, and as Chiavacci Leonardi contends (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24  \softline
[Milan: Mondadori, 1991]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , p. 845), the present tense for Malatestino's rulership is used, not by \softline
the poet, but by Pier da Medicina, and he is speaking in 1300.  Two other things should also be \softline
noted: first, Malatestino was }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 co-ruler}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Rimini with his father, Malatesta, in 1295 or soon \softline
thereafter; second, the date of the incident referred to has never been established, since no \softline
commentator has any information about it.  Still further, the reference to Malatestino in the \softline
previous canto has him functioning with his father in nefarious deeds ca. 1295.  For at least these \softline
reasons there is no cause to believe that Dante is here referring to Malatestino's perfidy as 
occurring in 1312 or later.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Unriddled, the passage means that the entire Mediterraean Sea never witnessed so \softline
great a crime.  For the phrase 'gente argolica,' meaning 'Greeks,' a synecdoche based on the part \softline
(the denizens of Argos) for the whole (Greece) see (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.78), as was noted by Torraca in 1905 \softline
(comm. to these verses).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Malatestino, one-eyed, holds Rimini, the city that Curio (v. 102) wishes he had \softline
never seen (because it was there that he offered the advice that condemns him to this punishment).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 89-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The two men of Fano (v. 76) will have no need of prayer for help against the \softline
tricky winds off Focara's point because they will be dead.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante, his appetite whetted by Pier's elliptical phrasing at v. 87, wants him to \softline
expand.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 96-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Pier opens the tongueless mouth of Curio, seen as a schismatic for his advice to \softline
Caesar to march on Rome, thus destroying the Republic and causing the civil wars.  For Curio in \softline
Lucan and Dante, see Stull and Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 "The Lucanian Source of Dante's Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  63 (1991 [1997]), pp. }{\plain \fs24 \f1 27-28.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The description of Mosca dei Lamberti is one of the most affecting in this canto \softline
filled with affective moments.  Mosca was among those Florentine citizens mentioned by Ciacco \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.80) as having attempted to do good in the divided city; for his crime, of those mentioned \softline
he is the farthest down in hell.  A fervent Ghibelline, in 1216 he urged the murder of \softline
Buondelmonte dei Buondelmonti, who, engaged to a girl of the Amidei family, married a Donati \softline
instead.  The result of this killing was the origin of the bitter rivalry between the Amidei and the \softline
Donati, Ghibellines and Guelphs respectively, and of the civil discord that tore Florence apart.  \softline
Mosca is thus seen as a modern-day Curio, urging the powerful to do what in their hearts they \softline
must have known was not to be done.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab His words, 'a done deed finds its purpose,' so mercilessly laconic, now cause him enough \softline
by way of regret that we can sense some justification in Ciacco's original characterization of him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante is nonetheless stern in his criticism of Mosca, not accepting his gesture of \softline
penitence, and Mosca is left with his deserved heartbreak.  There is no zest for the wicked in this \softline
poet.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet's self-assurance, playful though it certainly is, may offend some \softline
readers.  He can narrate what is to follow because he knows he actually saw the next scene, a \softline
shade carrying his severed head.  For the motif of the decapitated corpse see Paola Allegretti \softline
({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Chi poria mai pur con parole sciolte}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII],{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [2001], pp. 9-25), pp. 9-10.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bertran de Born, one of the great poets of war of his or any time (and thus \softline
greatly admired by Ezra Pound in the last century) loved to see destruction of towns and men.  \softline
One thinks of Robert Duval's character in Francis Ford Coppolla's film }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Apocalyse Now}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , who loved 
the smell of napalm in the morning.  His plangent tone, as he opens his remarks to Dante, would \softline
have bothered him considerably, had he been able to read this scene -- and perhaps Dante thought \softline
exactly this himself, as he composed them.  It is often pointed out that v. 132 is a reprise of a \softline
passage in the Lamentations of Jeremiah (1:12), already cited by Dante in the opening verses of an \softline
'exploded' sonnet in (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.3) to express his own solitary sadness in love.  In a sense, they are \softline
part of Bertran's punishment, the 'tough guy' portrayed as self-pitying.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Bertran was a Gascon nobleman of the second half of the twelfth century.  His poetry, \softline
which is reflected in several passages in this canto, is not the subject of his discourse.  Rather, he \softline
condemns himself for his implacable schismatic actions at the English court, where he supported \softline
and encouraged the rebellious plotting of Prince Henry against his own father, Henry II, king of \softline
the realm.  For a text that.1 encapsulates the problem presented in Bertran and all the other \softline
political schismatics, see Luke 11:17: 'Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to \softline
desolation' (cited by Marianne Shapiro in }{\plain \fs24 "The Fictionalization of Bertran de Born [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXVIII]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  92 [1974],}{\plain \fs24 \f1  p. 114).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the reference to Ahitophel's similar support and encouragement of Absalom's rebellion \softline
against }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  father, King David, see II Samuel 15:7-18:15).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab On Bertran's poetry see Michelangelo Picone, }{\plain \fs24 "I trovatori di Dante: Bertran de Born," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Studi e problemi di critica testuale}{\plain \fs24  19  (1979), pp. 71-94}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For its resonance in the verses of this \softline
canto see Paola Allegretti ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Chi poria mai pur con parole sciolte}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII],{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 \softline
[2001], pp. 9-18).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 contrapasso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is generally understood to be based on an Aristotelian term in \softline
its Latin translation, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 contrapassum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , used in the same sense that the biblical concept of retribution, \softline
expressed in the Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lex talionis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the taking of an eye for an eye, etc.), is understood to have.  \softline
That is, one does something wrong and receives the appropriate punishment for doing it.  Out of \softline
the Hebrew and Aristotelian concept (the latter refined by Thomas's commentary on Aristotle), \softline
Dante supposedly developed this idea, which is given a  name here, but has been operative since \softline
we saw the first sinners in hell, the neutrals, in Canto III.  For a lengthy and helpful gloss, see \softline
Singleton (comm. to this verse).  Valerio Lucchesi (}{\plain \fs24 "Giustizia divina e linguaggio umano.  \softline
Metafore e polisemie del contrapasso dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  63 [1991 (1997)], pp. 53-126)}{\plain \fs24 \f1   \softline
has mounted a complex argument attempting to deny this positive understanding of the term by \softline
Dante on the basis of its instability as a concept that St. Thomas actually embraces.  For a \softline
thorough review of the entire question and of Dante's possible sources for the term (and \softline
understanding of them) see Peter Armour, "Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 contrapasso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Context and Texts," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italian \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  55 (2000), pp. 1-20.\par
}}