{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Œ×;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f4\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}{\f5\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Œ× CE;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 29}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's weeping eyes have reminded commentators, beginning with Tommaseo, of \softline
Biblical sources, particularly Isaiah 16:9 and 34:7, as well as Ezekiel 23:33.  The commentary of \softline
Durling and Martinez (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 1996)}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , p. 458, suggests an echo of a passage in St. Augustine's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Confessions}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (VI.8), when Alypius \softline
is described as becoming drunk on the sight of the blood spilled at the Roman games.  For \softline
reference to this same passage in another connection (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . IX.58-60) see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  \softline
IX.58-63.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 4-7.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Virgil's rebuke, reminiscent of that found in (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XX.27-30), is particularly stern, as \softline
though Dante were guilty of the sort of appalling human ghoulishness that makes people today \softline
gather at the scenes of fatal accidents.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 8-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Virgil's sarcastic thrust for the first time in the poem offers us a measurement of the \softline
size of one of the areas of hell: this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is twenty-two miles in circumference.  (We will \softline
discover, at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XXX.86, that the next }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f2 's circumference is exactly half this one's.)  These \softline
two measurements were the cause of an orgy of calculating in the Renaissance, involving no less a \softline
figure than Galileo in absurd plottings of an implausibly huge Inferno.  For an account of these, \softline
see John Kleiner, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Mismapping the Underworld: Daring and Error in Dante's "Comedy"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1994)}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , pp. 23-56.  Fabrizio Cacciafesta ("Un'osservazione \softline
sulla geometria delle Malebolge," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f2  4 [2003], pp. 397-99) points out the \softline
impossible landscape that Dante's measurement here and in the following canto (XXX.84-87) \softline
geometrically calls for: the walls separating }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f2  from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f2  would have to be over one mile \softline
thick.  As a result he would like us to consider the possibility that the passage in the next canto \softline
(XXX.86) that currently reads 'undici' (eleven) perhaps originally read 'ventun' (twenty-one).  \softline
There is no manuscript evidence to support such a reading.  Perhaps we need to accept the fact \softline
that Dante either was not conscious of every detail in his constructed afterworld or that, if he was, \softline
he enjoyed playing such games with his reader.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 10.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Castelvetro (comm. to verse 11) hears the echo here of the Sibyl's words in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f2  \softline
VI.539, 'nox ruit, Aenea; nos flendo ducimus horas' (Night is coming, Aeneas; we waste the time \softline
in weeping).  He goes on to add that Servius, in his commentary to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f2  VI.255, pointed out \softline
that only a single day was granted by the gods for Aeneas's journey to the underworld.  We \softline
understand that the same is true for Dante, whose voyage in hell takes exactly twenty-four hours.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 11-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Virgil's lunar time-telling suggests that, since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  XXI.112, some six hours \softline
have passed, making it ca. 1:30 pm now and leaving less than five hours for the completion of the \softline
journey.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 13-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Defending himself against the charge of idle curiosity, Dante informs Virgil that he \softline
was looking for the shade of a relative among the schismatics.  The exchange shows that Virgil \softline
cannot in fact 'read' Dante's thoughts.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  XXIII.25-30.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 16.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   For the word 'parte' as used here adverbially, as a Florentine provincialism meaning 
'meanwhile,' see Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 16-21). \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 22-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Virgil now adds some details to Canto XXVIII: he had seen Geri del Bello menace \softline
Dante while the protagonist was so preoccupied by Bertran de Born.  This family drama runs as \softline
follows.  Geri del Bello, Dante's father's cousin, was evidently something of a trouble-maker (he \softline
was once cited for attacking a man in Prato in 1280).  He was murdered, perhaps at about this \softline
time, by a member of the Sacchetti family, and revenge was only achieved by another member of \softline
the Alighieri clan ca. 1310 (perhaps just as Dante was finishing }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ).  The details are far from \softline
clear, and the accounts in the early commentators diverge.  See Simonetta Saffiotti Bernardi and \softline
Renato Piattoli, 'Alighieri, Geri' (ED.1970.1).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 31-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   For the delicate interplay between Dante's aristocratic sense of the necessity of \softline
acting on behalf of his family's honor and his Christian knowledge that vengeance is the province \softline
of God alone, see Lino Pertile, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 "Canto XXIX: Such Outlandish Wounds,"  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis: \softline
{\u8220\'93}Inferno{\u8221\'94}}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. A. Mandelbaum, A. Oldcorn, C. Ross (Berkeley: University of California Press, \softline
1998),}{\plain \fs24 \f2  pp. 378-84.  Pertile also argues that Dante and Geri play out the roles of Aeneas and Dido \softline
in the underworld, when the guilty former lover fails to communicate with the shade of his \softline
offended dead paramour and leaves with his guilt unresolved (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VI.450-476).  Dante's feeling \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 pio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  -- piteous toward Geri -- would seem to connect him with Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 pius Aeneas}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , who also \softline
honored his familiars.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 37-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The change in setting, from one }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f2  to the other, is more abrupt than usual.  \softline
The first thirty-six verses of the canto have been a sort of personal addendum to the last canto; the \softline
rest of it will combine with the next one to present the final ditch of the Malebolge, devoted to the \softline
punishment of forgery, in various forms: of metals (all in Canto XXIX), of persons, of coin, of \softline
words (all in Canto XXX).  For the 'fraudulent' blending of metals by alchemists, those punished \softline
in the rest of this canto, see Sharon Meyer, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 "Dante's Alchemists," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italian Quarterly}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 (1969), pp. \softline
185-200}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 40-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   These 'lay brothers' of the 'monastery' of the forgers are piteous in their aspect and \softline
in their groans; the protagonist, now of sterner stuff than he had been under the influence of his \softline
relative's unavenged murder, covers his ears (where he had feasted his drunken eyes at the \softline
beginning of the canto).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 46-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The Valdichiana and Maremma, in Tuscany, and Sardinia were all characterized by \softline
malarial outbreaks in the summer.  Commentators speak of the special hospitals set up in the \softline
Valdichiana to deal with outbreaks of the disease.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 52-53.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   They cross the last bridge, now seen as an entity, the long span (interrupted over \softline
the sixth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ) that traverses the extent of Malebolge.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 54-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   God's unerring justice is portrayed as the punishing agent of the counterfeiters.  \softline
But what does it mean that she records or 'registers' them?  And where is 'here'?  Most early \softline
commentators argued that 'here' referred to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .  Beginning in the Renaissance, the \softline
majority believe that it refers to this world.  But what sense does it make to say that justice 
'registers' sinners in this world?  The image is of writing down a person's name in a book.  For a \softline
review of the debate over the line (57) see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \f1 "Dante's 'Book of the Dead': A Note on \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX, 57," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  54 [1982], pp. 31-51}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ), proposing that 'here' means 'this \softline
book,' i.e., Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2 , a solution that was put forth (although never discussed by later \softline
commentators) by John of Serravalle in the fifteenth century (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XXIX.52-57).  Dante \softline
will once again (and only once again) use the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 registrare}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  XXX.63, when his \softline
name, 'Dante,' is 'registered here,' i.e., in his text.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab Lino Pertile ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Qui}{\plain \fs24 \f2  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2 : deittici e cultura popolare," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Italian Quarterly}{\plain \fs24 \f2  37 [2000], pp. \softline
64-67) argues against this view, claiming that the reference of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 qui}{\plain \fs24 \f2  is to this world: 'God's justice \softline
punishes }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 there}{\plain \fs24 \f2  in the tenth pouch the counterfeiters whom first she registers }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 here}{\plain \fs24 \f2  on earth, when, \softline
still alive, they commit their sins' (p. 65).  This explanation, which was first advanced by Gabriele \softline
and then Daniello in the sixteenth century, has the disadvantage of inventing a curious verbal \softline
concept: how may we conceive of justice 'registering' sins on earth?  The essentially bookish \softline
nature of the word supports the hypothesis that Pertile would like to displace.  Further, if we \softline
examine all 47 uses of this locative adverb (which appears some 190 times in the poem as a \softline
whole) that precede this passage, the result is telling.  Whenever Dante or Virgil (or other \softline
characters in the poem) speak within the narrative, 'qui' usually refers to hell in general or to a \softline
specific place in it, and even, though much less often, to a moment in an exposition, e.g., Ciacco is \softline
described as one who 'Qui puose fine al lagrimabil suono' (with that he ended his distressing \softline
words -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VI.76 [the same phenomenon is observed when Dante speaks as character, as at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
X.96, at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XVI.127, and at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XIX.88, or when Virgil does so at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2  .XIV.120 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
XXIX.23]).  Still further, when Dante speaks as narrator, looking back upon his experience (e.g., \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VII.25), he once also indicates a place in hell and not the earth.  Not once, before this \softline
passage, does }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 qui}{\plain \fs24 \f2  refer to this world.  It will do so for the first and only time in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
XXXII.15) when Dante/narrator addresses the treacherous imprisoned in the ice of Cocytus: 'O \softline
you misgotten rabble... better had you }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 here}{\plain \fs24 \f2  been sheep or goats!'  However, when, as narrator, he \softline
refers to a place indicated by the adverb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 qui}{\plain \fs24 \f2  he elsewise indicates his poem: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  II.9, \softline
XXV.143.  And for exactly the same phenomenon, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  I.7, I.9, VIII.19, and XXX.63 \softline
(where }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 qui}{\plain \fs24 \f2  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 registrare}{\plain \fs24 \f2  are reunited, as was previously noted).  He will also use }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 qui}{\plain \fs24 \f2  to refer to \softline
the poem four times in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f2  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . I.16, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . V.109, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XVIII.9, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XXX.16).  In short, \softline
Pertile's reading, following the interpretation that became normative after the sixteenth-century \softline
interventions of Gabriele and his student, Daniello, has less support in Dante's usual practice than \softline
one might at first believe, and none deriving from a passage occurring before the one that we are \softline
studying.  (For }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 qui}{\plain \fs24 \f2  referring to the earth there are more instances in the last two }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [and \softline
especially the last one] than the single case found in the first: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . X.96, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XXXII.61, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
II.12, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . II.37, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . IX.71, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XII.16, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XIV.25, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XIV.112, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XVIII.22, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . \softline
XVIII.128, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . XXI.141.)  What we can say with clear evidence is that when a first-time reader \softline
encounters the adverb in this passage Dante's previous usage would encourage the belief that \softline
'here' refers to his book.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab For another participant in the sixteenth-century debate over the claims for truthfulness put \softline
forward by Dante on behalf of his poem, see Stefano Jossa's study (}{\plain \fs24 "}{\plain \fs24 \f1 La 'verit{\f4 \'42}' della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  \softline
I }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Discorsi sopra Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Sperone Speroni,}{\plain \fs24 "}{\plain \fs24 \f1  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rivista di Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1 [(2001], pp. 221-41}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ), \softline
which grounds itself in the considerations of Bernard Weinberg's chapter "The Quarrel over \softline
Dante" (in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 A History of Literary Criticism}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ], vol. II, \softline
pp. 819-911).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 58-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Details from Ovid's lengthy account of the plague, sent by Juno, on the island of \softline
Aegina (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f2 . VII.523-657) is here used in simile to describe the falsifiers, who have become \softline
plague-blasted shades of humans because of their counterfeiting, in which that which is worth less \softline
is made to seem worth more.  That their affliction is an infernal version of leprosy (some \softline
commentators believe it is scabies [see v. 82]) is attested by Umberto Bosco, 'lebbroso' \softline
(ED.1971.3) and in his commentary to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f2  XXIX.124, on the basis of medieval medical \softline
treatises, some of which report that scabies is a secondary symptom of leprosy.  Capocchio, the \softline
second of the two sinners revealed here, is described as 'leprous' (v. 124).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab In verse 63 Dante takes mere poetic fictiveness to task.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  IV.xxvii.17 he had \softline
referred to this story as a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 favola}{\plain \fs24 \f2  [fable]).  His 'real' sinners may resemble the plague-victims in \softline
Ovid's fanciful tale; unlike them, however, they are not present in a fable, but in a truthful \softline
narrative.  Here Dante's insistence on the veracity of what he relates is so challenging that we can \softline
see the wink in his eye.  We know that Ovid's tale of the restoration of the depleted human \softline
population of the island from the eggs of ants is literally untrue.  And surely we have similar \softline
reservations about the truthfulness of Dante's. We are led ineluctably to realize two things: (1) \softline
Dante is a fabulator, like Ovid, not a 'historian'; (2) it is nonetheless necessary to his plan to insist \softline
that he is not a 'mere poet,' but one who has been given an experience of what is real and true.  \softline
For a study of this problem see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 "Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Theologus-Poeta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  94 (1976), \softline
pp. 91-136}{\plain \fs24 \f2 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 73-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   The three rapid comparisons are the very stuff of homely poetry: pans on a stove, \softline
stable-boys currying horses, cooks' helpers cleaning fish.  We have seen precisely this stylistic \softline
range before, paired similetic passages describing the same thing in two very different registers, \softline
that of classical myth deployed alongside that of 'scenes from everyday life.'  Among other things, \softline
this second register, with its ordinary, even ugly, names of things in the real world, helps us \softline
'believe' that Dante's poetry is in fact 'true,' while Ovid's is not -- even as we acknowledge that \softline
Dante is as much a fabulator as was Ovid.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 85-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Even Virgil's ironic }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 captatio}{\plain \fs24 \f2  reflects the low style of things in this scene.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 109-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Griffolino d'Arezzo was in fact burned at the stake for a charge of heresy \softline
brought by Albero di Siena, perhaps the natural son of the bishop of Siena, ca. 1270.  Thus he \softline
was put to death for a sin he did not commit, but condemned by God for the one he did: falsifying \softline
metals.  Dante obviously enjoyed telling this tale of bufoonish credulity, in which Griffolino failed \softline
in his role of Daedalus to Albero's Icarus, and which would have fit a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 novella}{\plain \fs24 \f2  of Boccaccio, even \softline
though it is not even tangent to the sin punished here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 121-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Florentines love to belittle the Sienese; Italians love to belittle the French.  \softline
Dante gets two for one.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 124-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Capocchio was burned alive as an alchemist in 1293.  As was the case when we \softline
listened to Griffolino, what we first hear about from him does not concern falsification, but \softline
another topic altogether -- the luxurious living of the Sienese, down to their over-indulgence in \softline
the use of cloves to season their food.  This is exemplified in Stricca the spendthrift; Niccol{\f4 \'62} the \softline
gourmet; and Caccia d'Asciano, with Abbagliato, part of the notorious }{\plain \fs24 \i\f2 brigata spendereccia}{\plain \fs24 \f2  
(spendthrift society) of Siena, which liked to gather to eat and drink and then destroy the plates \softline
and service while they were at it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab For the use of cloves in cooking see Marcella Roddewig, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 "'La costuma ricca del garofano' \softline
ed i buongustai del tempo di Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Per le nozze di Corallo di Enzo Esposito e Citty Mauro}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(Ravenna: Longo, 1990), pp. 109-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f2 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f2 136-139.}{\plain \fs24 \f2   Capocchio was, according to some early commentators, known to Dante in \softline
their early days as students.  He was supposedly a particularly adept imitator of the words and \softline
gestures of others, a talent which he later extended to 'alchemical' malfeasance, to his cost.  For \softline
the concept of the ape as mimic, see Ernst Robert Curtius, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 European Literature and the Latin \softline
Middle Ages}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , tr. W. R. Trask (New York: Harper & Row, 1963 [1948]}{\plain \fs24 \f2 ), pp. 538-40.\par
}}