{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 25}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Emphasizing the close relationship between the two cantos, this one begins in \softline
absolute continuation of the action of the last, as though there were no formal divide between \softline
them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Vanni's obscene gesture to God is variously understood.  Francesco da Buti (comm. to vv. \softline
1-5) says that the gesture is made by extending two fingers on each hand (apparently the same \softline
gesture as giving the sign of the horns, for cuckoldry, but the commentator does not say so), and \softline
in this case, four fingers in all, thus accounting for the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 squadrare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ('to square'), with its \softline
resonance of fourness.  Beginning with Pompeo Venturi in the 1730s, most commentators say \softline
that the gesture is made by placing the thumb between the index and middle fingers.  Ignazio \softline
Baldelli, however, has recently argued that the gesture involves making the image of the female \softline
pudenda with thumb and index finger ("Le 'fiche' di Vanni Fucci," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della \softline
letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  114 [1997], pp. 1-38).  For disagreement with Baldelli's finding see Giorgio \softline
Colussi, "La forma, il significato, il nome dei gesti.  A proposito delle fiche di Vanni Fucci," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Carmina semper e citharae cordi, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 ed. M. C. G{\f2\u233\'e9}rard-Zai, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 et alii}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Geneva: Editions Slatkine, \softline
2000), pp. 309-13; Andrea Mazzucchi, "Le 'fiche' di Vanni Fucci (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXV 1-3): Il contributo \softline
dell'iconografia a una disputa recente," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rivista di Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1 (2001), pp. 302-15.  \softline
Whatever the precise gesture Vanni made, it was not a polite one.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The serpents, according to Guido da Pisa (comm. to vv. 4-12), become Dante's 'friends' \softline
because they undo the reason for the curse laid on the serpent in the Garden (Genesis 3:15); these \softline
serpents are doing something praiseworthy despite their unappealing ancestry.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 5-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The serpents attaching themselves to Vanni reminded Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 7-9) \softline
of the serpents that kill the sons of Laoco{\f2\u246\'f6}n and eventually capture the priest himself in their coils \softline
and strangle him (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.201-224).  Other commentators have not followed his lead.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet apostrophizes Pistoia as he nears the end of the section of these cantos \softline
devoted to Vanni Fucci.  The next thieves whom we will see will all be Florentines.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Vanni's pride is unfavorably compared even to that displayed by Capaneus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XIV.49-60).  We are reminded once more that sins, in any given sinner (living or dead) are often \softline
several; Capaneus, a blasphemer, and Vanni Fucci, a thief, are both portrayed as being motivated \softline
by pride against God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 17-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is here, at last, that we find the answer to the question the text left us with in the \softline
last canto -- or so Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ad ira parea mosso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : God's Voice in the Garden," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
101 [1983]), pp. 36-37, has claimed.  Verses 65-78 of the previous canto had Dante eager to \softline
discover the identity of the speaker of those unformed words and Virgil getting him closer to their \softline
source so that he could have his answer.  The descent, however, allows him to see still other (very \softline
distracting) things: the serpents and then Vanni Fucci.  The moment Vanni disappears we finally \softline
hear that voice and have our question answered.  All commentators who have dealt with the issue \softline
have argued either that the voice was Vanni's or that its identity was intentionally and totally \softline
masked by the author.  It seems, on the other hand, that the voice is that of Cacus, the thieving 
centaur, who will be named at v. 25.  What do we discover?  He is angry ('pien di rabbia'), as was \softline
that voice (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ad ira mosso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and not }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ad ire mosso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ); he cries out in perverse imitation of God's voice \softline
in the Garden in the Bible (Genesis 3:9), asking hiding Adam, 'Where are you?'.  (See the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.91-96.)  Cacus is in pursuit of Vanni Fucci, 'unripe' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 acerbo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) because of his sin.  Later \softline
in the poem Satan is also portrayed as having fallen from heaven 'unripe' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 acerbo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in his sinfulness \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.48), while Adam, beginning his life innocent, without sin, is referred to as having been \softline
created by God 'ripe' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 maturo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in the Garden (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.91).  Thus, in this 'replay' of the primal \softline
scene of theft in the Garden, Vanni takes on the role of Adam after the fall, having moved from \softline
ripeness to unripeness, hiding from his just maker, while Cacus plays the unlikely role of the \softline
vengeful God in pursuit of his fallen child (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.19-33).  For a much \softline
different reading, see Tobias Leukner, "L'acerbit{\f3 \'42} di Vanni Fucci.  Sul contrapasso del Caco \softline
dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 (2003), pp. 401-5.  Leukner argues that Cacus is actually \softline
in search of friendship and has been denied it by Vanni, who is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 acerbo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the sense that he is \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 retroso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , difficult or stand-offish; as a result, Cacus is furious with him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Cacus was strictly speaking not a centaur, but the tradition that he was one \softline
extends at least until the prologue of Cervantes' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Don Quijote}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Virgil does refer to him as \softline
'semihominis Caci' (half-human Cacus) at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.194, but his context is clear: Cacus is the \softline
son of Vulcan, not of Ixion, father of the Centaurs.  And so Dante's decision to make him a \softline
centaur, a 'brother' of the keepers of the first ring of violence in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII, is either completely \softline
his own or reflects a tradition about which we know nothing.  See Giorgio Padoan, 'Caco' \softline
(ED.1970.1), pp. 741-42.  On the other hand, many details of this passage clearly reflect those \softline
found in the lengthy passage describing Hercules' killing of Cacus for his theft of cattle in Virgil's \softline
poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.184-275), dragging them into his cave backwards so that their hoof-prints would \softline
lead away from the guilty party's lair.  It seems clear that Dante here had Virgil's poem in mind as \softline
his prime source and that he knowingly distorts Virgilian text: in Virgil Cacus is not a centaur; in \softline
Virgil his mouth gives forth smoke and fire (vv. 198-199; 252-255; 259) while in Dante he has a \softline
dragon on his back to do that for him; in Virgil Hercules strangles Cacus (vv. 260-261) while in \softline
Dante he clubs him over the head (see Hollander, "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ad ira parea mosso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : God's Voice in the \softline
Garden," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  101 [1983], pp. 40-41).  We have seen such willful rearrangement of \softline
Virgilian material before, notably in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX, and will see it again (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.103-105), when \softline
the unseen Briareus will be described in very un-Virgilian terms (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.97-105).  As Rebecca Beal points out ("Dante among Thieves: Allegorical Soteriology in the Seventh \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV and XXV]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medievalia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9 [1983], pp. 108-10), Cacus was often seen as \softline
related to Satan, since Hercules was frequently understood to represent Christ.  For the possible \softline
influence of Fulgentius on Dante's treatment of Cacus see Christopher Kleinhenz, "Notes on \softline
Dante's Use of Classical Myths and the Mythographical Tradition," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Romance Quarterly}{\plain \fs24 \f1  33 \softline
(1986), pp. 481-82.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The Maremma is a boggy region of Tuscany, the Aventine one of the seven hills of pre-civilized Rome.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The frenetic action described in this canto is so amply described that less than \softline
fifteen percent of its verses are spoken by its characters, the lowest figure for any canto in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The three sinners will turn out to be Agnello (named at v. 68), Buoso (v. 140), Puccio (v. 
148); Cianfa literally joins Agnello (named at v. 43); Francesco will be added, referred to \softline
indirectly (v. 151).  Thus there are five Florentines thieves seen here in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first of the five Florentines referred to in the canto, Cianfa, according to early \softline
commentators, was a member of the Donati family; he apparently died in 1289.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 44-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's digital gesture hushes Virgil.  When we consider the enormous liberties the \softline
poet has just taken with the text of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , we may not be surprised, within the fiction, at his \softline
rather peremptory treatment of his leader.  Madison Sowell ("Dante's Nose and Publius Ovidius \softline
Naso: A Gloss on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  24.45," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 [1989], pp. 157-71) argues for a \softline
pun here on Ovid's name: Dante is 'shushing' Virgil by holding his finger across his mouth to his \softline
nose (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 naso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) and Ovid's name is, of course, Publius Ovidius }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Naso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  The hyptothesis would be more \softline
attractive were not the context of the gesture so clearly Virgilian.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's sixth address to the reader in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  insists on the unusual nature of his \softline
narrative -- as though we needed the reminder.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As we will eventually be able to puzzle out, Cianfa is the serpent attaching itself, in \softline
a parody of sexual embrace, to Agnello.  See endnote to this canto for some details.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The third of these three rapid comparisons has caused difficulty: does the poet \softline
refer to a flame moving across a piece of parchment, turning the nearer material brown before it \softline
blackens? or to the wick of a candle, which similarly turns brown before turning black?  The \softline
strongest case for the former is that, in the case of the candle wick, the brown color moves }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 down}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
the wick, while Dante says the brown moves }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 suso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ('up,' 'along').  See Anna Maria Chiavacci \softline
Leonardi, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Milan: Mondadori, 1991), p. 746.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 68.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Agnello (or Agnolo) dei Brunelleschi, a Ghibelline family, of whom the commentators \softline
have little to say that can be relied upon as coming from history rather than from Dante's \softline
placement of him among the thieves.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 69-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the 'mating' of the two thieves, twentieth-century commentators, beginning \softline
perhaps with Grandgent (comm. to verse 72), point to the conjunction in a single bi-sexual body \softline
of Ovid's nymph Salmacis and Hermaphroditus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.373-379).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The final coupling of the canto conjoins Buoso and Francesco in yet a third \softline
version of punishment seen in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see the endnote to the canto).  The 'dog days' are the \softline
hottest part of summer in late July and early August.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A new figure (Francesco) assaults one of the remaining two (Agnello and Cianfa \softline
have moved off), known as Buoso, as we shall learn near the canto's end.  Does this 'mating' \softline
remind us, because of the reference to the umbelicus (which Adam was uniquely without), of the \softline
creation of Eve from Adam's rib, while he slept?  The language of the passage and the overall \softline
relation of the scenes in these two cantos to scenes in the Garden recorded in Genesis might make \softline
this venturesome hypothesis worthy of consideration.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The three rhetorically balanced tercets perform a task slightly different from the \softline
one they are traditonally accorded, i.e., the modern poet's victorious boast over his creaky \softline
classical forebears.  But that is what the first two both seem to do: let Lucan be silent with his \softline
horrible tales of soldiers slain by serpents in the Libyan desert in Book IX of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Pharsalia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; let \softline
Ovid be silent with his tales of Cadmus, transmogrified into a serpent (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.563-603), and \softline
of Arethusa, transformed into a spring (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.572-641).  The third puts forward the modern \softline
poet's superiority: Buoso and Francesco do not sustain individual transformations, but exchange \softline
their very natures, one becoming the other.  Is the radical difference between Lucan/Ovid and \softline
Dante the poetic novelty of the latter, as would seem to be the case?  Or is it rather the result of \softline
this poet's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  inventing his marvels, but merely describing them?  We all realize that the first \softline
explanation is in fact correct, Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 does}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (and means to) outdo his classical precursors.  But then \softline
we may reflect that his claim is that he is not making this up, but merely observing 'reality,' God's \softline
vengeance on the floor of the seventh }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Let fictive poets yield to this new Christian teller of \softline
truths revealed, the humble scribe of God.  We do not have to believe this claim, but we can sense \softline
that it is being lodged.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This, the most fully described of the various metamorphoses found in these two \softline
cantos, is broken by Castelvetro (comm. to XXV.103-135) into seven stages of mutual \softline
transformation, Francesco into a man and Buoso into a serpent.  The former becomes a man as \softline
follows: (1) his tail becomes legs, (2) his front paws become arms, (3) his rear legs become a \softline
penis, (4) his hide becomes skin, (5) his posture changes from prone to erect, (6) his snout \softline
becomes a face, (7) his serpentine hiss becomes a voice.  Buoso, naturally, goes through exactly \softline
the obverse process.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Francesco, not identified until the last verse of the canto, turns momentarily \softline
away from Buoso, having regained his power of speech, only to use it to express his desire to \softline
punish him, addressing Puccio (see verse 148).  As for Buoso, his identity is much debated.  \softline
Michele Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), pp. 305-22, suggests \softline
that he is probably Buoso di Forese Donati (died ca. 1285).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 144.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Campi (comm. to vv. 142-144) points to Landino's and Vellutello's understanding of \softline
this Florentine verb, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 abborracciare}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as meaning to make something of a botch of things as a result \softline
of working too quickly.  Thus Dante's worries that his pen, following these never-before-observed \softline
and rapid transformations, may have blotted his page a bit when he attempted to set them down.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 148.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Puccio Galigai, nicknamed 'Lameshanks,' of a Ghibelline family.  As for the reason \softline
for his not undergoing transformation, as do the four other Florentines in this canto, Fallani, in his \softline
commentary to verse 151, follows Lorenzo Filomusi Guelfi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuovi studi su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Citt{\f3 \'42} di \softline
Castello: Lapi, 1911], pp. 185-95) suggesting that Puccio Sciancato, the only sinner in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
who is not changed in form, perhaps represents simple fraud, also treated by Aquinas in the \softline
passage referred to in the endnote that follows.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 151.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Francesco de' Cavalcanti (the identification is not certain) who, murdered by \softline
inhabitants of the town of Gaville, in the upper Arno valley, was avenged by his relations.\par
}}