{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 23}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-3.}{\plain \fs24   The quiet opening of the canto compares the two travelers to pairs of Franciscan \softline
mendicants.  Casini/Barbi, in their commentary to this passage, cite the words of St. Francis to his \softline
followers, telling them to go in pairs: 'Ite cautissimi, bini et bini, per diversas partes orbis' (go \softline
forth with great care, two by two, through the various parts of the world).  As John of Serravalle \softline
reminds us, in his comment, the most authoritative of the two traditionally went before.  Thus, \softline
when we consider the considerable time spent in exploring Virgil's difficulties in the preceding two \softline
cantos, we probably ought to perceive the delicate irony inherent in these verses.  It will be \softline
present again, more palbably, at the close of this canto: see Hollander ("Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24  and \softline
the Classical Tradition: the Case of Virgil," in }{\plain \fs24 \i The "Divine Comedy" and the Encyclopedia of \softline
Arts and Sciences: Acta of the International Dante Symposium, 13-16 November 1983, Hunter \softline
College, New York}{\plain \fs24 , ed. G. Di Scipio and A. Scaglione [Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1988]), pp. \softline
22-23, for the way in which Virgil's loss of authority, tacitly alluded to here, is underlined more \softline
heavily by Catalano's mocking words at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXIII.142-144.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 4-18.}{\plain \fs24   The absolute source of this fable of 'Aesop' is not known, but it seems that Dante \softline
may have been acquainted with both the collection circulated under the name }{\plain \fs24 \i Romulus}{\plain \fs24 , which \softline
Kenneth McKenzie ("Dante's References to Aesop," }{\plain \fs24 \i Seventeenth Annual Report of the Dante \softline
Society}{\plain \fs24  [1900], pp. 1-14}{\plain \fs24 ) says is the (Carolingian) collection adverted to by the various \softline
fourteenth-century commentators who discuss the passage, and the later one (12th century) \softline
assembled by Waltherius Anglicus.  Clara Kraus, in the entry 'Esopo' (ED.1970.2), pp. 729-30, \softline
points out, following McKenzie, that this particular fable derives from an unknown non-Aesopic \softline
source, even if the poet presents it as being by him.  (Dante had referred to Aesop once \softline
previously: }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24  IV.xxx.4.  For the question of sources see also Enzo Mandruzzato, \softline
"L'apologo 'della rana e del topo' e Dante," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  33 (1955-56), pp.147-65, and Sam \softline
Guyler, "Virgil the Hypocrite -- Almost: A Re-interpretation of }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  90 \softline
(1972), pp. 29-31, the latter reviewing the discussions of McKenzie ("Dante's References to \softline
Aesop," }{\plain \fs24 \i Seventeenth Annual Report of the Dante Society}{\plain \fs24  [1900], pp. 1-14}{\plain \fs24 ); Larkin ("Another \softline
Look at Dante's Frog and Mouse," }{\plain \fs24 \i Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24  77 [1962], pp. 94-99); "}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno \softline
}{\plain \fs24 XXIII, 4-9, Again," }{\plain \fs24 \i Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24  81 (1966), pp. 85-88; and Padoan ("Il liber }{\plain \fs24 \i Esopi}{\plain \fs24  e \softline
due episodi dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24  41 [1964], pp. 75-102) and eventually favoring \softline
Waltherius as source text.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The fable runs roughly as follows: a mouse, wishing to cross a river, is advised by an \softline
apparently friendly frog to allow himself to be attached to that frog by a string, to which project \softline
he consents.  Once the frog, mouse in tow, reaches mid-stream, he dives in an attempt to drown \softline
the mouse.  An over-flying kite, or hawk, seeing the struggling mouse atop the waters, dives \softline
down, captures and kills the mouse -- and the attached frog, a bonus.  It seems sensible to believe \softline
that, as the protagonist reviews the events of the prior canto, he thinks of two things: the aptness \softline
of the fable to the situation of Ciampolo (mouse [Guyler, p. 32, points out that Ciampolo has \softline
already been compared to a mouse at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXII.58]), Alichino (frog), and Calcabrina (kite), as \softline
well as to his own: Dante (mouse), Virgil (frog), and the Malebranche (kite).  Thus the beginning \softline
and the end of the fable are particularly apt to his situation: in order to reach the next }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24  he \softline
has tied himself to Virgil, and now the kite must be on its way.  That Virgil should be cast in the \softline
role of the double-dealing frog seemed so unlikely that no one, until Guyler, pp. 35-40, suggested 
as much.  While this writer agrees with him, the complexity of the passage, it should be noted, \softline
guarantees that its meaning will continue to be debated.  For some of the disparate and confused \softline
responses see Hollander ("Virgil and Dante as Mind-Readers [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXI and XXIII]," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24  9 [1984]), pp. 92-93, where, in an admittedly incomplete listing, one may find \softline
ten different interpretive versions of the correspondences among mouse, frog, and kite and either \softline
the various Malebranche and/or the various protagonists.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The words 'mo' and 'issa' are both dialectical forms, meaning 'right now,' derived from the \softline
Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i modo}{\plain \fs24  (used again in this canto at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIII.28 and a total of 25 times in the poem) and \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i ipsa hora}{\plain \fs24  (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXIV.55).  Hollander ("Virgil and Dante as Mind-Readers [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXI \softline
and XXIII]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24  9 [1984]), p. 93, suggests that the choice of words for 'now' \softline
accentuates the imminent and immediate danger in which Dante finds himself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19.}{\plain \fs24   For Dante's hair, curling tight with fear, Pietro di Dante (Pietro1 to vv. 19-20) \softline
adduces }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  II.774: 'steteruntque comae' (and my hair stood on end).  The setting for the \softline
scene is the night of the destruction of Troy.  A few lines earlier (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . II.733) Aeneas is warned \softline
by his father, Anchises, to flee: 'nate,... fuge, nate; propinquant' (my son, my son, flee -- they are \softline
coming closer).  Moments later, Aeneas realizes that he has lost Creusa, and turns back to the \softline
flaming city to find her.  His wife's ghost appears to him in a vision that is the cause of his hair \softline
standing on end.  If Dante was thinking of this scene, as Pietro believed, he has perhaps put \softline
Anchises' warning about the fast-approaching Greek marauders into his own mouth, the advice he \softline
might have expected to have heard from Virgil, }{\plain \fs24 \i his}{\plain \fs24  'father,' and the author of that scene.  For \softline
these observations see Hollander ("Virgil and Dante as Mind-Readers [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXI and XXIII]," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24  9 [1984], p. 94 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 25-30.}{\plain \fs24   As Mark Musa ("Virgil Reads the Pilgrim's Mind," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  95 [1977], pp. \softline
149-52) has pointed out, Virgil, here and elsewhere }{\plain \fs24 (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.51; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X.17-18; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVI.119-120; \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.39; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.73-74) is either accorded by the protagonist or confers upon himself the \softline
power of 'reading Dante's mind.'  Musa shows that, rather than the power actually to read the \softline
protagonist's thoughts, Virgil's capacity is one of heightened rationality, not the kind of \softline
supernatural power enjoyed by Beatrice, who, like all beatified souls, has precisely the ability to \softline
read unvoiced thoughts; in other words, Virgil is able to fathom what Dante is thinking from the \softline
context of the experiences that they share, and nothing more than that.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Dante refers to mirrors being made by backing clear glass with lead in }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24  III.ix.8.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 34-36.}{\plain \fs24   The Malebranche are back, the 'kite' of the fable, about to pounce on 'mouse' and \softline
'frog.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 37-45.}{\plain \fs24   This simile, classical in form, seems to have no classical counterpart (although the \softline
fires of dying Troy may come to mind), whether in image or in language; rather, it seems to be \softline
among those that Dante draws from contemporary experience, ruinous fires being a pronounced \softline
feature of medieval town life.  Virgil's customary paternal role here is resolved into a maternal \softline
one.  That we should take this surprising change as meant positively is guaranteed by a later \softline
scene, just as Virgil has left the poem and returned to Limbo.  At this moment of greatest pathos \softline
involving Dante's love for his guide and teacher, Dante turns back to him as a frightened child \softline
runs to his mother (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXX.44), only to find him gone forever.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-48.}{\plain \fs24   The second simile is also without classical origin.  Commentators point out that \softline
land mills were powered by water, diverted from other sources along sluices, while water mills \softline
were situated in the rivers or streams that powered them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 52-57.}{\plain \fs24   At the border of their domain the Malebranche, so swift on their own turf, are now \softline
frozen into immobility by the laws of God's governance of hell, as Dante and Virgil look back at \softline
them.  The victims of earthly barrators are not similarly protected.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-60.}{\plain \fs24   The new set of sinners is characterized, in a total change of pace, by slowness and \softline
quiet, in stark contrast with the extraordinarily energetic, even frenetic, pace of the cantos of \softline
barratry.  For an appreciation of the overarching harmony of Dante's art in Cantos XXI to XXIX, \softline
see Momigliano's comment to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIII.58-144.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab They are 'lacquered' in that they are covered by gilded mantles (v. 64).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 61-63.}{\plain \fs24   The hypocrites, 'dressed' as monks, are in fact represented by only two \softline
personnages, Catalano and Loderingo, both friars (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIII.104-108).  The \softline
hypocrisy of the clergy -- and especially of the mendicant orders -- was a medieval commonplace, \softline
one most effectively exploited by such writers as Boccaccio and Chaucer.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab While many early commentators believed that the monastery referred to was located in \softline
K{\f1\u246\'f6}ln (Cologne), in Germany, the predominant modern view is that this is the great Benedictine \softline
monastery in France, at Cluny.  For discussion of these two possibilities and indeed, begining with \softline
Zamboni in 1870, of yet a third (Cologna, near Verona) see Scartazzini (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIII.63).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 64.}{\plain \fs24   'Ypocresia... dicitur ab "epi" quod est "supra" et "crisis" quod est "aurum"' (Hypocrisy \softline
is so called from 'epi,' that is, 'above,' and 'crisis,' that is, 'gold').  This familiar gloss, deriving from \softline
Uguccione of Pisa, is found in the third redaction of Pietro di Dante's commentary (Pietro3, \softline
comm. to vv. 58-66).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 66.}{\plain \fs24   Almost all the early commentators relate the tale that Frederick II (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X.119) put \softline
those who had particularly offended him to the following torture and death: he would have them \softline
covered with a thick 'cape' of lead and placed in a large crucible, under which a fire was set, \softline
causing the lead to melt and the victim to suffer greatly before dying.  While there is no evidence \softline
to connect Frederick with this practice, it seems clear that many of his contemporaries believed \softline
that he indeed did dispatch his enemies in this way.  See George L. Hamilton, "The Gilded Leaden \softline
Cloaks of the Hypocrites (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 , XXIII, 58-66)," }{\plain \fs24 \i Romanic Review}{\plain \fs24  12 (1921), pp. 335-52.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 76.}{\plain \fs24   Once again Dante's Tuscan speech serves to find him damned souls whose lives will \softline
be of interest.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  X.22; XXII.99.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 77.}{\plain \fs24   The sinner shouts because Dante and Virgil seem to be racing past him (Casini/Barbi, \softline
citing Biondolillo in their comm. to this verse).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 92.}{\plain \fs24   For Dante's word 'hypocrites' commentators frequently cite Matthew 6:16: 'Moreover \softline
when you fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that \softline
they may appear to men to fast.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 102.}{\plain \fs24   The friars are like creaking scales (literally, 'balances' in Dante's Italian) because the \softline
weight they support on their lurching shoulders is so tremendous that they 'creak' beneath it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 103.}{\plain \fs24   Ca.1260 a group of Bolognese citizens founded a conventual order, sanctioned by \softline
the pope (Urban IV), to serve as champions of the Virgin Mary.  They became known as 'Frati \softline
Gaudenti,' or 'Jovial Friars,' apparently as a result of their fairly relaxed rule, which allowed them \softline
many of the comforts of the secular life (e.g., marriage).  For Dante's relationship to Bologna see \softline
Raimondi, "I canti bolognesi dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  dantesco," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e Bologna nei tempi di Dante}{\plain \fs24  \softline
(Bologna: Commissione per i Testi di Lingua, 1967), pp. 239-48.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 104-108.}{\plain \fs24   For Catalano and Loderingo see Singleton{\u8219\'27}s comment to verse 104.  Catalano \softline
(ca. 1210-1285) was a Bolognese Guelph of the Catalani family; Loderingo degli Andal{\f2 \'62} (ca. \softline
1210-1293) belonged to a Ghibelline family of the city.  Loderingo was one of the founders of the \softline
Bolognese order of the Frati Gaudenti, and Catalano was also involved in it.  While their \softline
allegiances to opposing parties made them seem to be an ideal 'couple' to serve as }{\plain \fs24 \i podest{\f2 \'42}}{\plain \fs24  (an \softline
office usually taken on by a single non-citizen, chosen in the hope of guaranteeing fairness) of a \softline
faction-riddled city, their vows to the pope meant that, once they were chosen to serve in \softline
Florence in 1266, they in fact sided with the forces of the pope (Clement IV) against the \softline
Florentine Ghibellines, with the result that the area known as the Gardingo, where some of the \softline
most powerful Ghibelline families lived (including Farinata's Uberti -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X), was razed by \softline
the populace with at least the tacit consent of these two.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 109.}{\plain \fs24   There is dispute as to whether Dante's broken apostrophe of the two friars (or, as \softline
some believe, of friars in general) was going to be one of rebuke (e.g., Benvenuto da Imola, \softline
comm. to vv. 109-111) or commiseration (e.g., Francesco da Buti, comm. to vv.109-123).  The \softline
context and the similar moment in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XIX.90-117, when Dante upbraids Pope Nicholas III, \softline
both would seem to support the harsher reading.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 110-117.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's attention is drawn by the figure crucified upon the ground, attached \softline
through his hands and his conjoined feet.  From Catalano's description it will become clear that \softline
this is Caiaphas, the high priest who urged the Pharisees 'that one man should be martyred for the \softline
people' and bears that burden of responsibility for the death of Jesus (see John 11:50).  As \softline
Chiavacci Leonardi points out (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24  [Milan: Mondadori, \softline
1991], p. 696), Caiaphas masks his own vicious motives for wanting to give over Jesus as a desire \softline
for the public weal (i.e., saving the rest of the Hebrews from Roman repression), thus justifying \softline
his presence among the hypocrites.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 118-120.}{\plain \fs24   The punishment of Caiaphas (and of his fellows in this act of hypocrisy, referred \softline
to in the next tercet) is a refinement upon that of the rest of the hypocrites.  They are cloaked in \softline
lead, he is naked (his Christ-centered hypocrisy deserves to be revealed); yet he, too, feels the \softline
weight of hypocrisy on his own body when each of the others, in turn, slowly walks over his \softline
outstretched form.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 121-123.}{\plain \fs24   Catalano refers to Annas, the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who presided over the \softline
council of the Pharisees (the 'others' of the text) by which Jesus was condemned.  It was this 
action, in Dante's mind, which was punished in the destruction of the second Temple by the forces \softline
of the Roman emperor Titus in 70 A.D. and in the resultant diaspora of the Hebrew people.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 124-126.}{\plain \fs24   The high priest, unlike Jesus, is crucifed upon the ground and trodden upon \softline
(thus seeming so 'ignoble').  There has been much discussion of the possible reasons for Virgil's \softline
'marveling' over the crucified shape of Caiaphas.  Castelvetro, in error (in his comm. to this \softline
passsage), says that Virgil would have seen Caiaphas on an earlier visit to the depths; Lombardi \softline
gets this right: when Virgil was sent down by Erichtho (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IX.22-24), Christ had not yet been \softline
crucified and Caiaphas not yet been damned.  Further, and as Margherita Frankel has argued \softline
("Dante's Anti-Virgilian }{\plain \fs24 \i villanello}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  102 [1984], p. 87), Virgil has already seen \softline
Christ and his Cross (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IV.53-54).  Nonetheless, and as others have pointed out, Virgil does not \softline
marvel at others who were not here before his first visit.  Rossetti, commenting on this passage, \softline
further remarks that nowhere else in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  does Virgil marvel at }{\plain \fs24 \i any}{\plain \fs24  other sinner, the text thus \softline
conferring a specialness upon this scene.  Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to vv. 114-117) and \softline
Vellutello (comm. to this passage) both offered an interesting hypothesis, which has since made its \softline
way into some modern commentaries: the verse at line 117, 'one man should be martyred for the \softline
people,' seems to echo a verse of Virgil's (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . V.815): 'unum per multis dabitur caput' (one life \softline
shall be given for many).  (In that passage Neptune speaks of the coming 'sacrifice' of Palinurus.)  \softline
Vellutello sees that 'prophecy' as an unwitting Virgilian prophecy of Christ, and suggests that \softline
Virgil now wonders at how close he had come.  If that seems perhaps a forced reading, a similar \softline
effect is gained by the phrase that Dante uses to indicate Caiaphas's punishment in his 'eternal \softline
exile' (}{\plain \fs24 \i etterno essilio}{\plain \fs24 ).  That phrase will only be used once again in the poem, precisely by Virgil \softline
himself to indicate }{\plain \fs24 \i his own}{\plain \fs24  punishment in Limbo (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXI.118), as Castelvetro (comm. to verse \softline
126) observed, if without drawing any conclusion from the observation.  The Anonimo Fiorentino \softline
(comm. to this passage), perhaps better than many later commentators, caught the flavor of this \softline
passge, which he reads as indicating Virgil's grief for himself because he had not lived in a time \softline
when he could have known Christ.  In this reader's view, Virgil wonders at Caiaphas because the \softline
high priest had actually known Christ in the world and yet turned against Him.  Had Virgil had \softline
that opportunity, he thinks, his life (and afterlife) would have been very different.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 131.}{\plain \fs24   The 'black angels' are obviously the winged devils of the last }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24 .  Are they \softline
actually fallen angels, or does Virgil merely speak ironically, employing the figure antiphrasis, \softline
indicating devils by their opposites?  Most of the commentators seem to believe that these really \softline
are fallen angels.  This may be a questionable interpretation, since Dante seems clear about the \softline
kinds of fallen angels found in hell: neutral (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . III.37-42) and rebellious (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VIII.82-83).  If this \softline
were the only other place in hell in which we found evil creatures referred to as 'angels,' it would \softline
seem likely that the term would be merely a figure of speech on Virgil's part.  However, we also \softline
have the black Cherub referred to by Guido da Montefeltro (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.113).  (See the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.112-114.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 133-138.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's question to Catalano (and Loderingo) receives this devastating answer: \softline
he has been fooled by Malacoda; all the bridges connecting the fifth and sixth 'valleys' are down.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The noun }{\plain \fs24 \i ruina}{\plain \fs24 , describing the fallen rock that will allow an exit from this }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24 , \softline
connects to the same word used with the same meaning in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XII.4 and XII.34.  And see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V.34 for the difficult problem of its meaning in that verse.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 142-144.}{\plain \fs24   Catalano's bit of 'university wit' is the last straw for Virgil, pilloried with \softline
understated sarcasm for trusting in the words of devils.  Catalano cites Scripture (John 8:44): \softline
'Diabolus est mendax et pater eius' (The devil is a liar and the father of lies).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 145-148.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil, angered (as well he might be), strides away, followed by the protagonist.  \softline
Frankel ("Dante's Anti-Virgilian }{\plain \fs24 \i villanello}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  102 [1984]), pp. 85-89, connects the \softline
anger Virgil feels now to the simile that opens the next canto.  She also observes (pp. 96-97) that \softline
the passage picks up an earlier apostrophe of Virgil by his pupil: see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XI.91, 'O sol che sani \softline
ogni vista turbata' (O sun that heals all troubled sight).  Now we perceive that Virgil is himself \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i turbato}{\plain \fs24 .  We reflect that it is Dante who has contrived this whole elaborate scene to the \softline
discomfiture of Virgil, but who now, as character in the poem, follows humbly and caringly in his \softline
dear leader's footsteps.  Hollander ("Dante's 'Georgic' [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXIV, 1-18]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  102 \softline
[1984]), pp. 115-17, has suggested that this last verse is modelled on the penultimate verses of \softline
Statius's }{\plain \fs24 \i Thebaid}{\plain \fs24  (XII.816-817): ' ...nec tu divinam Aeneida tempta, / sed longe sequere et \softline
vestigia semper adora' (do not attempt to rival the divine }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 , but follow at a distance, always \softline
worshiping its footsteps).  With this gesture Statius tries to reassure his reader (and perhaps \softline
himself) that he feels no envy toward Virgil's greatness; Dante's gesture has a different task to \softline
perform, to reassure himself (and his reader) that, for all that the poet has put Virgil through in \softline
these cantos of barratry, he nonetheless reveres his great pagan guide.\par
}}