{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 20}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-3.}{\plain \fs24   The uniquely self-conscious opening of this canto, featuring the only explicit \softline
numeration of a canto in the poem, has caused a certain puzzlement and even consternation.  One \softline
discussant, H. D. Austin, has argued that its prosaic superfluity recommends that future editors \softline
either excise it from the poem, as an addition by an over-enthusiastic scribe, or at least print it in \softline
square brackets ("The Submerged [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 ., XX, 3]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Romanic Review}{\plain \fs24  23 [1932]), pp. 39-40.  Its \softline
self-consciousness and difficulty, one might argue in rejoinder, are precisely signs of Dantean \softline
authorship.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The opening line (which a student, Simina Farcasiu [Princeton '83] some years ago \softline
suggested was a redoing of the first verse of Ovid's }{\plain \fs24 \i Metamorphoses}{\plain \fs24 : 'In nova fert animus mutatas \softline
dicere formas / corpora' [My mind inclines to tell of bodies changed into new forms]) portrays a \softline
poet who only unwillingly commits himself to the difficult task he now must assume.  Many of the \softline
words of this first tercet have received close critical attention.  }{\plain \fs24 \i Nova}{\plain \fs24  has either the sense (or both \softline
senses, as our translation would indicate) of 'new' or 'strange' (see D'Ovidio ["Esposizione del \softline
canto XX dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i Nuovo volume di studi danteschi}{\plain \fs24  (Caserta-Rome: A. P. E., 1926), \softline
p. 318]).  }{\plain \fs24 \i Matera}{\plain \fs24  is, as Chiavacci Leonardi says (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24  [Milan: \softline
Mondadori, 1991]), p. 599, a 'technical term,' one used to denote the subject that a writer chooses \softline
to treat.  }{\plain \fs24 \i Canto}{\plain \fs24  is here used for the first time (it will be used again only at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIII.90, }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
V.16, and }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . V.139) to indicate a part of the poem; as Baranski ("The Poetics of Meter: }{\plain \fs24 \i Terza \softline
rima}{\plain \fs24 , 'canto,' 'canzon,' 'cantica,'" in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Now: Current Trends in Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Theodore J. \softline
Cachey, Jr. [Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1995]), pp. 3-4, has pointed out, the \softline
early commentators found this term strange, rendering it with Latin or Italian words for 'chapter' \softline
or 'book.'  }{\plain \fs24 \i Canzone}{\plain \fs24  is a still more troubling choice of word (it is used twice more, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXXI.134, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXXII.90); in }{\plain \fs24 \i De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24  (e.g., II.viii.2-9) it is the word (}{\plain \fs24 \i cantio}{\plain \fs24  in \softline
Dante's Latin) that describes the lofty vernacular ode that Dante presents (with himself as most \softline
successful practitioner of the form) as the height of poetic eloquence in the mother tongue, and \softline
thus 'tragic' in tone, because it is like the lofty style of the classical poets.  Is Dante suggesting that \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  is tragic?  For some thoughts along this line see Hollander, "The Tragedy of Divination in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1980), pp. 137-40.  It is only in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXXIII.140 that he will finally give a part of the poem the name it now enjoys: }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24 , with its \softline
religious (resonance of Solomon's Canticle of Canticles [see Lino Pertile, "}{\plain \fs24 \i Canto-cantica-Comed{\f1\u237\'ed}a}{\plain \fs24  e l'Epistola a Cangrande," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24  9 (Fall, 1991), pp. 107-8]) and \softline
'comic' overtones.  And finally there is the apparently strikingly inexact word }{\plain \fs24 \i sommersi}{\plain \fs24 , which has \softline
seemed to many commentators wrong, since the damned are not submerged in water but buried \softline
under earth.  Marino Barchiesi ("Il Testo e il Tempo," }{\plain \fs24 \i Il Verri}{\plain \fs24 , ser. V, no. 4 [December 1973], p. \softline
85) resolved this problem by finding a probable source in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  (VI.267), where Virgil asks \softline
the gods for permission 'pandere res alta terra et caligine mersas' (to reveal things immersed deep \softline
in earth and darkness).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab If the opening tercet causes this much difficulty, what follows will often be at least as \softline
challenging.  One of the most interesting and provocative studies of the canto remains Parodi's \softline
essay (E.G. Parodi, "La critica della poesia classica nel ventesimo canto dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno," Atene e \softline
Roma}{\plain \fs24  11 [1908], pp.183-95, 237-50).  It is a canto that is still today renowned for its problematic \softline
nature.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 4-9.}{\plain \fs24   The first description of the diviners insists upon their silence and their misery, \softline
expressed by tears, the only form of expression allowed them, given the fact that their necks are \softline
twisted, thus cutting off the possibility of speech.  We are probably meant to reflect on the fact \softline
that their voices, announcing their false prescriptions were the instruments of their deception of \softline
their clients/victims.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 10-12.}{\plain \fs24   Hollander has suggested ("The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies \softline
in Dante}{\plain \fs24  [Ravenna: Longo, 1980], p. 141) that the image of the twisted necks of the diviners, \softline
with the resultant loss of the capacity of speech, may have been suggested by a text in Lucan \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Phars}{\plain \fs24 . V.197), in which Apollo closes off the throat of a prophetess (Phemonoe) before she can \softline
reveal the rest of a dire prophecy, thus depriving her Roman listener of news of his unhappy \softline
destiny: 'Cetera suppressit faucesque obstruxit Apollo' (Apollo closed her throat and suppressed \softline
the rest of her speech).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 13-15.}{\plain \fs24   The backward-looking diviners suffer this }{\plain \fs24 \i contrapasso}{\plain \fs24  for having looked, with \softline
wrongful intent, into the future.  Biblical references have seemed apt to an occasional \softline
commentator.  Pietro di Dante (Pietro2, comm. to vv. 10-15) adduces Isaiah 44:25: '[I am the \softline
Lord] That frustrates the tokens of the liars, and makes diviners mad; that turns wise men \softline
backward, and makes their knowledge foolish' ([Ego sum Dominus] Irrita faciens signa \softline
divinorum, / Et ariolos in furorem vertens; / Convertens sapientes retrorsum, / Et scientiam eorum \softline
stultam faciens).  Rossetti (comm. to vv. 10-18) adverts to another biblical passage (Micah 3:6-7): \softline
'Therefore night shall be unto you, that you shall not have a vision; it shall be dark unto you, that \softline
you shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over \softline
them.  Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded' (Propterea nox vobis pro \softline
visione erit, / Et tenebrae vobis pro divinatione, / Et occumbet sol super prophetas, / Et \softline
obtenebrabitur super eos dies. / Et confundentur qui vident visiones, / Et confundentur divini).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-24.}{\plain \fs24   The first tercet of this fourth address to the reader in this }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24  (see note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
VIII.94-96) is generally understood as indicating that, given the sad sight he must behold, Dante \softline
is excusing himself from blame for weeping.  Benvenuto da Imola, however, has a differing view \softline
(and says that 'this subtle fiction is poorly understood by many others').  According to him (comm. \softline
to these verses), Dante's tears reveal his guilty feelings about his own involvement in astrological \softline
prediction and that 'as a result he presents himself as weeping out of compassion for others, and \softline
for himself because of his own errors' (Ideo bene fingit se nunc ita plorare compatiens aliis et sibi \softline
de errore suo).  It is possible to read the passage in an even harsher light.  If the reader is to \softline
'gather fruit' from reading this passage, is it not likely that its point is that Dante was wrong to \softline
weep for these creatures?  What he feels is sadness at the human figure rendered so contorted, \softline
forgetting the reason for the (entirely just) punishment.  And the language of verse 21 allows a \softline
different understanding (and translation) than it generally receives: how Dante might well have \softline
refrained from weeping, but failed to behave as would have been only appropriate.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For discussion of two other passages in the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.70-72; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIII.82-84) in which \softline
Dante feels pity for the sinners that is evidently not sanctioned, see Hollander, "The Tragedy of \softline
Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1980), p. 168n.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 25-27.}{\plain \fs24   Dante weeps and thereby earns Virgil's rebuke (which commentators since 
Tommaseo [comm. to these lines] have related to the words that Jesus directed to Peter and the \softline
other apostles, slow to take his meaning, found in [Matthew 15:16]: 'Adhuc et vos sine intellectu \softline
estis?' [Are you also even yet without understanding?]).  A question that has exercised many \softline
readers is whether the protagonist already knows that those punished here are the diviners.  While \softline
some, like Ettore Caccia ("Canto XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i "Inferno": Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Le \softline
Monnier, 1967], p. 695) and Antonino Pagliaro (}{\plain \fs24 \i Ulisse}{\plain \fs24 : }{\plain \fs24 \i ricerche semantiche sulla "Divina \softline
Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Messina-Florence: D'Anna, 1967], p. 611), argue that Dante weeps only at the \softline
piteous condition of the contorted human body, and not for the lot of the diviners, others, like \softline
Marino Barchiesi ("Catarsi classica e 'medicina' dantesca, Dal canto XX dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Letture \softline
classensi}{\plain \fs24  4 [1973], p. 62), reply that such distinction-making is over-subtle.  Indeed, the whole \softline
context of the canto would make it seem necessary that Virgil's rebuke is not aimed at so wide a \softline
target, but rather at Dante's failure to react adversely to the diviners.  The more general reading is \softline
also less capable of explaining the final image of the preceding tercet, in which the tears that move \softline
Dante to fellow-feeling are seen running down into the clefts of the sinners' buttocks.  It is no \softline
wonder that, even at its inception, he was so unhappy at the prospect of writing out this canto \softline
(XX.1): it contains a pointed reminder of his failure to respond correctly to the sin of divination.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28-30.}{\plain \fs24   Perhaps the tercet in the canto that has caused the most debate.  Where is 'here' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i qui}{\plain \fs24 )?  Who is indicated by the the first 'who' (}{\plain \fs24 \i chi}{\plain \fs24 )?  And what does the last verse of the tercet \softline
mean?  In response to the first two questions, Hollander has made the following observations \softline
("The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24  [Ravenna: Longo, 1980], p. \softline
147), dividing the most plausible series of answers into two groups: '(1) If Dante weeps for lost \softline
humanity in general, }{\plain \fs24 \i qui}{\plain \fs24  refers to hell in general and }{\plain \fs24 \i chi}{\plain \fs24  almost certainly refers to Dante.  (2) If \softline
Dante weeps for the diviners in particular, }{\plain \fs24 \i qui}{\plain \fs24  refers to this }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24  and }{\plain \fs24 \i chi}{\plain \fs24  almost certainly applies \softline
to the diviners.'  Carlo Steiner (comm. to vv. 29-30) argues that it seems logically inconsistent for \softline
Virgil to call Dante 'witless' at v. 27 and 'impious' at v. 29, as stupidity and impiety are some \softline
stages distant one from another.  For another reason, based in Lucan's text, to accept the second \softline
hypothesis, see Sonia Gentili, "La necromanzia di Eritone da Lucano a Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e il \softline
"locus inferni": Creazione letteraria e tradizione interpretativa}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Simona Fo{\f2 \'42} e Sonia Gentili \softline
(Rome: Bulzoni, 2000 [= }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi (e testi) italiani}{\plain \fs24  4 (1999)]),  pp. 35-38.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab As for the complicated philological problem regarding the exact reading of verse 30, this \softline
writer, along with many another, accepts the arguments of Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i La Commedia secondo \softline
l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 , pp. 181-82) for the reading 'passion comporta' (and not 'compassion porta' or \softline
'pass{\f2 \'56}on porta').  But what does this mean literally?  A passage in }{\plain \fs24 \i Monarchia}{\plain \fs24  (I.xi.6) may be of \softline
assistance.  There Dante says those who attempt to stir up a judge's passions are to be censured \softline
('repelluntur qui iudicem passionare conantur'); in our passage a similar concept has a rather \softline
different formulation, since the Judge in this case is God himself.  Thus, in this reading, the sin of \softline
the diviners is to believe (or to represent) that God is like us, that is, that He is subject to \softline
emotions in his response to human desiring; it is these emotions that diviners claim (fraudulently) \softline
to be able to decipher: e.g., if you sacrifice a living creature that you love, God will be \softline
predisposed to help you.  (For a fuller exposition, based on texts in Statius and St. Augustine, see \softline
Hollander, "The Tragedy of Divination," pp. 147-57, citing, for Augustine, the earlier discussions \softline
of Lorenzo Filomusi Guelfi, }{\plain \fs24 \i Nuovi studi su Dante}{\plain \fs24  [Citt{\f2 \'42} di Castello: Lapi, 1911], pp. 192-95; and \softline
now see Valter Puccetti ["La galleria fisiognomica del canto XX dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Filologia e critica}{\plain \fs24  \softline
19 (1994)], pp. 199-206).  This seems a consistent reading, one that keeps all strands of the 
passage clearly in sight.  Is it 'correct'?  That is harder to say.  For brief descriptions of a good \softline
half-dozen competing interpretations of the sin of the diviners see Ettore Caccia ("Canto XX," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i "Inferno": Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1967]),  pp. 688-90.  It should be \softline
remembered that the attempt to assay the future, while potentially sinful, is not in itself fraudulent.  \softline
Those who argue that it is the main thrust of Dante's view of divination should reconsider; it is the \softline
representation of untruth about the future that is blameworthy as fraudulent, for this involves a \softline
misrepresentation of the nature of God's judgment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 31-39.}{\plain \fs24   In Canto XI Virgil has two continuous speeches of some length, vv. 15-66 and vv. \softline
76-115.  We are here involved in Virgil's longest single speech in the poem, vv. 27-99.  Having \softline
warned Dante against the sin of divination, he now proceeds to identify its exemplars, beginning \softline
with five classical diviners.  The first of these derives from Statius.  Amphiaraus was one of the \softline
seven kings who joined in the assault, on behalf of Oedipus's son Polynices, against Eteocles, the \softline
other son of Oedipus, who first came to the rulership of Thebes in the wake of their father's death \softline
and who refused to step down in favor of his brother, as had been agreed, at the end of his \softline
appointed year.  Amphiaraus, by divination, saw that he would perish in the war against Thebes \softline
and secreted himself from the allies.  His hiding place was betrayed by his wife, Eriphyle, bribed to \softline
do so by Polynices with the necklace of Harmonia.  It was thus that Amphiaraus enjoined their \softline
son to put his mother to death (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XII.49-51 [and note] and }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . IV.103-105).  This \softline
warrior-diviner is the first hero to die in the war, a figure represented by Statius as brave and \softline
noble in the face of death.  Indeed, the incidents referred to here are a somewhat reinvented \softline
version of the narrative found in Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i Thebaid}{\plain \fs24  VII.690-823; VIII.1-210).  For Dante's willful \softline
distortions of the story of this augur, who is portrayed with great sympathy by Statius, see \softline
Hollander, "The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, \softline
1980), pp. 170-73.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 40-45.}{\plain \fs24   Dante derives his portrait of Tiresias, the Theban soothsayer, from Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
III.316-338).  For a study of Dante's recasting of this essentially positive presentation of Tiresias, \softline
making him a repulsive figure rather than the truthful and blameless seer he is in Ovid{\u8219\'27}s text, with \softline
particular attention to the }{\plain \fs24 \i verga}{\plain \fs24 , or magic wand, that Dante contrives for him, thus associating \softline
him with Circe and Mercury, see Hollander, "The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1980), pp. 173-84.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-51.}{\plain \fs24   Dante found Aruns in Lucan (}{\plain \fs24 \i Phars}{\plain \fs24 . I.584-638), discovering, in the diseased \softline
innards of a sacrifical bull, the foul outcome of the civil war (in Lucan{\u8219\'27}s view, surely the victory of \softline
Caesar over Cato).  Castelvetro (comm. to these verses) points out that, in Lucan's text, Aruns \softline
does not dwell in a cave but within the walls of Luni and that, furthermore, he was not an \softline
astrologer (as Dante implies) but used other means to develop his soothsaying (e.g., studying the \softline
flight of birds, the innards of animals, the course of the thunderbolt).  It is further notable that \softline
Dante does not refer to Erichtho, the diviner }{\plain \fs24 \i par excellence}{\plain \fs24  in Lucan's poem (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IX.23), but \softline
to the less egregious Aruns.  See Hollander, "The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1980), pp. 184-88.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 52-56.}{\plain \fs24   Compared with the violence done to classical texts in the preceding three examples \softline
(Amphiaraus, Tiresias, and Aruns), that done to Virgil's tale of Manto is even more remarkable.  
Even her hair seems to belong to another, whether the uncombed locks of frenetic Erichtho \softline
('inpexis... comis' -- }{\plain \fs24 \i Phars}{\plain \fs24 . VI.518), as Benvenuto da Imola suggested (comm. to vv. 52-54), or \softline
those of the Sibyl (perhaps the 'source' for Lucan's witch's hair), 'non comptae... comes' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
VI.48), as noted by Grabher (comm. to vv. 52-57).  Since the Roman poet, as surely Dante \softline
realized, had deliberately associated his birthplace (Pietola, then probably known as Andes, near \softline
Mantua) with Manto, so as to make himself, like her, a }{\plain \fs24 \i vates}{\plain \fs24 , or prophet (see the study by Marie \softline
Desport [}{\plain \fs24 \i L'Incantation virgilienne: Virgile et Orph{\f1\u233\'e9}e}{\plain \fs24  (Bordeaux: Delmas, 1952)]), Dante now \softline
makes his }{\plain \fs24 \i maestro ed autore}{\plain \fs24  recant the fiction that he himself had devised.  (Virgil's \softline
commentators themselves had wondered how the Greek Manto could have come to Italy in order \softline
to found her city, since Virgil's poem is the only text to contain this claim.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab One of the lasting problems left by this canto is its eventual contradiction of Dante's \softline
placement of Manto in Limbo (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXII.113\}, where Virgil tells Statius that various of the \softline
characters of whom the later poet wrote are found in that zone of the afterworld.  Previous \softline
writers had resorted to various hypotheses, none particularly satisfying, in order to explain how \softline
Dante could have forgotten what he had said about Manto here when he wrote the later passage, \softline
or that, with equal failure to satisfy, 'the daughter of Tiresias' of }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  XXII was someone \softline
other than Manto, or even that the original text read something other than 'la figlia di Tiresia.'  In \softline
the face of this problematic passage, some may choose to accept the view of Giancarlo Rati ("La \softline
piet{\f2 \'42} negata [Il canto XX dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ]," in his}{\plain \fs24 \i  La piet{\f2 \'42} negata: letture e contributi danteschi}{\plain \fs24  \softline
[Rome: Bulzoni, 2000 (1994)]), pp. 60-61, that here there is no willful correction of Virgil's tale \softline
of Manto, merely a tactic to establish how the truly mantic Virgil came by his gifts.  On the other \softline
hand, two Americans have argued independently that the apparent contradiction is intentional, and \softline
is based on Dante's willful insistence that the Manto portrayed by Virgil was indeed a diviner, \softline
while the same character portrayed by Statius was not (she is rather the dutiful daughter of \softline
Tiresias, helping with the chores, as it were).  See Richard Kay ("Dante's Double Damnation of \softline
Manto," }{\plain \fs24 \i Res publica litterarum}{\plain \fs24  1 [1978], pp. 113-28.) and Robert Hollander ("The Tragedy of \softline
Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24  [Ravenna: Longo, 1980], pp. 205-13).  Kay also \softline
argues, less convincingly, that Dante thought of Virgil's Manto as historical and of Statius's \softline
character as fictive, thus further excusing the bilocation.  Emilio Pasquini (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e le figure del \softline
vero: La fabbrica della "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Milan: Bruno Mondadori, 2001], p. 14), having accepted \softline
Padoan's disagreements with Petrocchi about the dating of the composition of the various parts of \softline
the poem, believes that the contradiction, apparently the result of Dante{\u8219\'27}s having had a change of \softline
heart about Manto, is merely the result of the earlier dissemination of }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX.  Yet Dante \softline
surely was not likely to have forgotten the large and agitated attention he had given to Manto, \softline
even at the distance of some years; nor would he have deliberately contradicted himself with \softline
ulterior purpose.  It is not material that he wrote the two passages at any particular time so long \softline
as he wrote }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX before he wrote }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  XXII.  For a reassessment of the entire \softline
question, with a new hypothesis accounting for Dante's deliberate 'self-contradiction,' see Palma di \softline
Cesnola, }{\plain \fs24 \i Questioni dantesche}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 2003), pp. 71-140.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 57-60.}{\plain \fs24   With risible understatement, the poet has Virgil ask for a little of the protagonist's \softline
time (his digression will continue until verse 99, occupying fully fourteen }{\plain \fs24 \i terzine}{\plain \fs24 ).  This passage \softline
begins by tacitly acknowledging the utter fictiveness of this account, since we have no source for \softline
what happened to Manto after Tiresias's death (and the conquest of Thebes by Creon).  Dante \softline
puts, into the mouth of Virgil, an account of her voyage into Italy.  As is the case for that 
undertaken by Ulysses in Canto XXVI, there is no known source for this one, either.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Maurizio Palma di Cesnola ("Teseo, Creonte e la morte di Tiresia [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XX 58-59]," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  15 [2000], pp. 117-25) points out that, after Creon's brief (unhappy but {\u8219\'27}legitimate{\u8219\'27} -- \softline
since he was Jocasta's brother) reign, it was Theseus who made Thebes {\u8219\'27}subject,{\u8219\'27} when he was \softline
called in to end the tyranny of Creon by the Thebans, and thus Manto left after that event and (we \softline
must presume) after the consequent death of her father.  Beginning with Scartazzini (1900), \softline
modern commentators fall into this error, which, as Palma points out, could have been avoided by \softline
a glance at Dante's source in Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i Thebaid}{\plain \fs24  XII.752-781), where it is clear that, after roughly a \softline
week of Creon's reign, the Thebans called on Theseus to free them of him.  This he did, killing \softline
Creon and seizing the city.  To their dismay, the city then remained subject to him, an Athenian, a \softline
foreigner.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 61-63.}{\plain \fs24   We turn our attention from the story of Manto in order to examine the landscape \softline
of Italy, to which she will repair in her wanderings.  Benaco is now known as Lake Garda.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 64-69.}{\plain \fs24   The fresh waters of northern Italy, entering into Garda, with its island that might \softline
serve for Christian services if the various bishops of its neighboring dioceses were to gather there, \softline
since a chapel on the island was subject to the jurisdiction of all three of them, will be seen to \softline
contrast with the muddy waters surrounding Manto's adoptive homeland once we arrive there.  \softline
For discussion of the meaning of these geographical references see Ettore Caccia, "L'accenno di \softline
Dante a Garda e i versi 67-69 nel canto XX dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e la cultura veneta}{\plain \fs24 , ed. V. \softline
Branca and G. Padoan (Florence: Olschki, 1966), pp. 307-25.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 70-72.}{\plain \fs24   The fortress at Peschiera, under the control of the Scaliger family of Verona, with \softline
whom Dante was on good terms by the time he was writing the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24 , is seen as strong enough \softline
to hold off attacks from the cities of Brescia or Bergamo.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 73-78.}{\plain \fs24   Leaving Benaco (Garda), the waters that began in the mountains to the north now \softline
head south (in the Mincio) and finally, after reaching Governolo, east (in the Po -- in which they \softline
finally reach the [Adriatic] sea).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 79-81.}{\plain \fs24   Here the attention of Dante turns back to a spot that the waters reach }{\plain \fs24 \i before}{\plain \fs24  they \softline
attain Governolo, the untilled, swampy land that will become the site of Mantua.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 85-93.}{\plain \fs24   Finally here is Manto.  She is described as 'vergine cruda' (cruel virgin [in the sense \softline
that she does not like the company of men]), a phrase that may reflect Statius's description of her \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Thebaid}{\plain \fs24  IV.463) as 'innuba Manto' and/or Dante's description of that other diviner, Erichtho, \softline
who is 'Erit{\f1\u243\'f3}n cruda' at }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  IX.23.  Here she practiced her divinatory arts with her servants \softline
and died.  Those who had fled her fearsome presence returned after her death and built Virgil's \softline
city upon her bones, giving it her name, but not her divinatory capacity.  What is at first shocking \softline
about this account is that it contradicts what we find in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 , where (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . X.198-203) we \softline
learn that the city was founded by Ocnus, the son of Manto.  In other words, Dante has excised \softline
(indeed, has forced Virgil himself to excise) Ocnus.  For if Manto had had progeny, as she did \softline
according to Virgil, then her mantic ability might have been passed on to others -- the claim that \softline
Virgil was evidently himself bent upon making in his poem (see, again, the study by Marie 
Desport [}{\plain \fs24 \i L'Incantation virgilienne: Virgile et Orph{\f1\u233\'e9}e}{\plain \fs24  (Bordeaux: Delmas, 1952)]) only to be \softline
forced to recant it here in Dante's.  It is an extraordinary moment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 94-96.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's reference to a late-thirteenth-century political disaster in Mantua probably \softline
seems gratuitous to the modern reader.  Given the poet's concern with the condition of his own \softline
Florence, however, we can appreciate his interest in the dramatic events resulting from when \softline
Guelph leader of Mantua, the Count of Casolodi, allowed himself to be tricked by the Ghibelline \softline
Pinamonte Bonacolsi, who apparently convinced him to expel many of the nobles in order to \softline
mollify the populace, angered by his having come from Brescia to rule in 1272.  Foolishly exiling \softline
even members of his own party, he was in time bereft of supporters; in 1291 Pinamonte led a \softline
popular revolt that sent him into exile and killed the remaining noble families.  The tercet offered \softline
Dante a moment's bitter reflection upon his own condition as exiled Guelph, brought about by the \softline
similar folly of his fellow citizens.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 97-102.}{\plain \fs24   Capping his (to us absurd yet amusing) contradiction of the details of the \softline
founding of Mantua published in his own poem, Virgil now gets Dante to swear that he will \softline
regard only the current version of that history as truthful, and that he will consider any other \softline
version, i.e., the Roman poet's own, as nothing other than a lie.  The protagonist dutifully assents.  \softline
Thus is Virgil made to remove the stain of divination from his poem and from himself.  The result \softline
is eventually quite different from what the tactic might have been intended to secure, i.e., Virgil's \softline
poem is seen precisely as associated with this fault.  See Teodolinda Barolini ("Canto XX: True \softline
and False See-ers," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis: {\u8220\'93}Inferno{\u8221\'94}}{\plain \fs24 , ed. A. Mandelbaum, A. Oldcorn, C. Ross \softline
[Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998]), pp. 283-84.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 106-114.}{\plain \fs24   Not even in Sinon's lying account of these events (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . II.114-119), to which \softline
the text refers, is Eurypylus said to be an augur: the message that he brings back from Apollo's \softline
shrine is then interpreted by Calchas, the 'true' augur in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 , to mean that Sinon must be \softline
sacrificed.  We should reflect that Dante must have realized that none of what Sinon says is \softline
truthful.  Yet he nonetheless uses this material in order to concoct his own still more inauthentic \softline
version of events.  See Hollander, "The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1980), pp. 200-3. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The phrase with which Virgil indicates the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 , 'l'alta mia traged{\f2 \'58}a,' has caused only \softline
some debate, as most commentators believe that, for Dante, with regard to its plot, Virgil's epic \softline
was a 'comedy' because it begins in difficulty (the shipwreck that initiates the action) and ends in \softline
happiness (the impending marriage of Aeneas and Lavinia; the impending foundation of Rome).  \softline
Its style, on the other hand, is generally seen as lofty, and thus, in Dante's understanding of such \softline
things, 'tragic' (see, for example, }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.82, where Virgil also refers to epic writing as being in \softline
the high, or tragic style: 'quando nel mondo gli alti versi scrissi' [when, in the world, I wrote my \softline
lofty verses]).  For an attack on the usual understanding, beginning with the view that Virgil's \softline
phrase would then be pleonastic ('l'alta mia traged{\f2 \'58}a' would need to be understood as having the \softline
sense of 'my lofty high poem,' twice referring to the stylistic level of the work), and arguing that \softline
both for a few early commentators and in Dante's own views the plot of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  is indeed \softline
tragic, see Hollander, "The Tragedy of Divination," pp. 214-18; }{\plain \fs24 \i Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia \softline
nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  (Florence: Olschki, 1983), pp. 130-34; }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante's Epistle to Cangrande}{\plain \fs24  (Ann \softline
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993), pp. 19, 62-66.  According to this reading, the 
meaning of Virgil's phrase is that his poem is lofty in style and unhappy at its conclusion, the death \softline
of Turnus at the hands of Aeneas, who gives over the ideal of clemency when he kills his enemy.  \softline
For sharp disagreement with this view, see David Scott Wilson-Okamura, "Lavinia and Beatrice: \softline
The Second Half of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  in the Middle Ages," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  119 (2001), pp. 103-24.  \softline
However, for a rare Italian understanding that, for Dante, the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  was a tragedy (if one based \softline
on different principles of observation), see Giorgio Agamben, "Comedy," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i The End of the \softline
Poem: Studies in Poetics}{\plain \fs24 , tr. Daniel Heller-Roazen (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999 \softline
[1978]), pp. 4-6.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 115-117.}{\plain \fs24   Michael Scot was indeed a Scotsman (lived ca. 1175-1235).  He studied at \softline
Oxford and Paris, eventually joining the court of Frederick II at Palermo.  For Frederick he \softline
translated some of Aristotle from Arabic, a language he had studied in Spain.  He himself wrote \softline
mainly on the occult sciences (e.g., alchemy, astrology) and achieved a large European following.  \softline
For a description of his }{\plain \fs24 \i Liber astronomicus}{\plain \fs24  see Lynn Thorndike, }{\plain \fs24 \i A History of Magic and \softline
Experimental Science}{\plain \fs24  (New York: Macmillan, 1923), vol. 2, pp. 826-35.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 118-120.}{\plain \fs24   Guido Bonatti (late thirteenth century) lived at Forl{\f2 \'58} and devoted himself to the \softline
study of astrology, probably serving in the capacity of soothsayer to Guido da Montefeltro (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXVII).  Bringing this unseemly 'parade' of diviners to a point near its close (only the nameless \softline
female cohort of sorceresses awaits us), Benvenuto of Parma, a cobbler nick-named 'Asdente' \softline
('toothless'), did his predicting in the late thirteenth century and was known, perhaps by reputation \softline
alone, to Dante, who ridicules him (}{\plain \fs24 \i Conv}{\plain \fs24 . IV.xvi.6).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 121-123.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's eight astrologers have moved from classical through thirteenth-century \softline
exemplars, the recent ones in descending nobility and literacy.  His list now declines to an \softline
anonymous plurality of commonfolk, women who practice witchcraft through brewing magic \softline
potions and making images of their clients' enemies.  For a detailed study of Dante and magic see \softline
Simon Gilson, "Medieval Magical Lore and Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  119 (2001), pp. \softline
27-66.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 124-126.}{\plain \fs24   The moon is setting over the point that demarcates the border of the hemisphere \softline
of land (with its center, in the medieval and moralized cartographical conception, at Jerusalem) \softline
and that of water.  The moon is setting in the ocean west of Seville and the sun is about to rise, \softline
from the perspective of one watching at Jerusalem.  Medieval legend has it that what is often \softline
referred to in our time as 'the man in the moon' was the image of Cain carrying a bundle of thorns.  \softline
For a study of this tradition see Stanislao Prato's book, }{\plain \fs24 \i Caino e le spine secondo Dante e la \softline
tradizione popolare}{\plain \fs24  (Ancona: Garzanti, 1881).   For the astronomical and cartographical \softline
ramifications of the passage see Corrado Gizzi, }{\plain \fs24 \i L'astronomia nel poema sacro}{\plain \fs24  (Naples: Loffredo, \softline
1974), vol. 2, pp. 113-36.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 127-129.}{\plain \fs24   Once again (see, for example, }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVI.106-108) Dante adds a detail to an \softline
earlier scene in the poem, the prologue, the action of which takes place on this earth.  There is no \softline
mention of the moon in the first Canto.  It is also not possible that Virgil means }{\plain \fs24 \i yesterday}{\plain \fs24  night, \softline
as some propose, for Dante and Virgil were then already in hell, having begun their descent on \softline
Friday evening after Dante spent his night in the wood on Thursday: '"yesternight," i.e. the night 
before last, it being now early morning' is the explanation offered in Tozer's gloss on this verse \softline
(comm. to verse 127).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 130.}{\plain \fs24   Having proscribed the word }{\plain \fs24 \i introcque}{\plain \fs24  from the illustrious vernacular in }{\plain \fs24 \i De vulgari \softline
eloquentia}{\plain \fs24  (I.xiii.2), Dante here employs it.  It is a Latinism (derived from }{\plain \fs24 \i inter hoc}{\plain \fs24 ) and means, \softline
roughly, 'meanwhile.'  That is how Dante uses it as an example of crude Florentine 'municipal' \softline
speech in }{\plain \fs24 \i De vulgari}{\plain \fs24 : 'Since we ain't got nuthin' else to do, let's eat' would be a colloquial \softline
American equivalent of the example he gives.  If writers of the illustrious vernacular are to avoid \softline
such expressions, we are perhaps forced to reflect that Dante's Comedy, unlike Virgil's lofty \softline
Tragedy, is written in the low style (and has a 'happy ending').  For discussions in this vein see \softline
Giorgio Barberi Squarotti ("}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 , XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i L'artificio dell'eternit{\f2 \'42}}{\plain \fs24  [Verona: Fiorini, 1972]), p. \softline
281; Hollander ("The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24  [Ravenna: \softline
Longo, 1980], pp. 214-18; and Claudia Villa ("Tra affetto e piet{\f2 \'42}: per }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  V," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24  \softline
51 [1999]), pp. 530-33.\par
}}