{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 26}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Matching the ironic apostrophe of Pistoia that follows the departure of Vanni Fucci \softline
in the last canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXV.10-12), this one of Florence comes in the wake of the poem's \softline
departure from the five Florentine thieves.  The image of Florence as winged has caused some \softline
puzzlement.  While commentators, beginning perhaps with Scartazzini/Vandelli, point out that \softline
Dante's words most probably echo the Latin inscription, dating to 1255, on the fa{\f2\u231\'e7}ade of the \softline
Florentine Palazzo del Podest{\f3 \'42}, proclaiming that Florence is in possession of the sea, the land, \softline
indeed the entire world, we are still left to speculate on Dante's reasons for presenting her as \softline
winged.  Whatever his reason, we might want to reflect that he thought of himself as the 'wing{\f3 \'50}d \softline
one' because of the easy pun available from his surname, Alighieri, in Latin 'aliger' (winged).  See \softline
Hugh Shankland, "Dante 'Aliger,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  70 (1975), pp. 764-85; "Dante \softline
'Aliger' and Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  32 (1977), pp. 21-40.  In this canto the apostrophised city \softline
and the seafaring Ulysses are both associated with 'wings' ('in our mad flight we turned our oars to \softline
wings' [v. 125 -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.125]); at least intrinsically, the protagonist is also.  He is on a better-purposed 'flight.'  For these motifs and another related one see Maria Corti, "On the Metaphors of \softline
Sailing, Flight, and Tongues of Fire in the Episode of Ulysses (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . 26)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
9 (1990), pp. 33-47.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The text alludes to the classical and medieval belief that morning dreams were more \softline
truthful in their content than any others.  Guido da Pisa is the first (but hardly the last) to refer to \softline
a text in Ovid to this effect (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Heroides}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.195-196).  On this subject see Charles Speroni's \softline
article, "Dante's Prophetic Morning-Dreams," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Philology}{\plain \fs24 \f1  45 (1948), pp. 50-59.  And \softline
see, for the same view of morning dreams, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.16-18.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The passage about Prato has caused two interpretive problems: (1) Does it refer to \softline
the anger felt by Cardinal Niccol{\f3 \'62} da Prato when he failed to bring peace between the warring \softline
Florentine factions in 1304 or to the rebellion of the town of Prato in 1309, when Florence's small \softline
neighbor cast out its Black Guelphs?  (2) Is Dante heartened or heart-sick as he contemplates this \softline
'future' event?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It was only in the eighteenth century that a commentator, Pompeo Venturi, suggested a \softline
reference to the cardinal (comm. to XXVI.9).  Further, since the second event was probably \softline
roughly contemporaneous to the writing of this canto, it seems likely that Dante would have \softline
enjoyed having so recent a piece of news as confirmation of his 'prophecy.'  As to his emotions, it \softline
seems more reasonable to reflect that Dante is admitting that he will only be happy once the \softline
power of the Black Guelphs of Florence is destroyed; he is in pain as he awaits that liberation.  In \softline
other words, this is not an expression of sadness for the city's coming tribulation, but a desire to \softline
see them come to pass -- and that is the common view of the early commentators.  As Poletto was \softline
perhaps the first commentator to note (in 1894), the passage is very like one found in one of \softline
Dante's 'political epistles' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.17), when he hopes that the invading forces of Emperor \softline
Henry VII will liberate the city.  As Chiavacci Leonardi observes (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno, con il commento di A. \softline
M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: Mondadori, 1991], p. 794), according to the chronicle of Giovanni Villani, news \softline
of Henry's election in 1308 was causing excited imperialist hopes all through Italy in 1309.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 14.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   While we do not believe that Dante says here what Petrocchi says he does, we have, 
as always, followed his text, which reads }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 iborni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (pallid, the color and coolness of ivory) and not, \softline
as the text had previously stood, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 i borni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the outcroppings of the rocks).  In our opinion the 'old' \softline
reading is the superior one.  Instead of 'on those stairs that turned us pale when we came down' \softline
we would say 'on the stairs the jutting rocks had made for our descent.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The steepness of the rock causes Dante to find hand-holds on the wall as he mounts.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   According to Lino Pertile ("Dante e l'ingegno di Ulisse," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
1 [1979], pp. 35-65), those who propose a negative view of Ulysses fail to acknowledge the \softline
importance of these verses, which reveal the poet's sympathy for the Greek hero even now as he \softline
writes of him.  He cites (p. 37) Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.135-139) in support of his argument.  \softline
However, that text offers Ulysses' vaunt of his own worthiness to receive the arms of Achilles \softline
(denying the claims of Ajax), and the entire passage gives us the portrait of a figure full of pride \softline
and self-love.  See Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Princeton: Princeton University \softline
Press, 1969), pp. 115-16, arguing that Dante, in this passage, is fully conscious of his previous \softline
'Ulyssean' efforts, undertaken by his venturesome and prideful intellect, and now hopes to keep \softline
them under control.  Castelvetro's reading of the passage is in this vein; according to him the poet \softline
grieves 'for having improperly put to use my genius' (comm. to vv. 19-22).  Dante hopes, in other \softline
words, to be exactly }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 unlike}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Ulysses.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In a lecture at Dartmouth College in the early 1980s Prof. Rachel Jacoff pointed out that \softline
Dante's verb for his necessary restraint, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 affreno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ('rein in,' 'curb'), reflects precisely what Phaeton \softline
failed to do, rein in his steeds: 'Fetonte abbandon{\f3 \'62} li freni' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.107).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first of two elaborate similes in prologue to the appearance of Ulysses deals \softline
with the number of the false counsellors: they are numerous as fireflies.  Dante, as peasant (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 il \softline
villano}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) resting on his hillside (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 poggio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  -- Frankel ["The Context of Dante's Ulysses: the Similes in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  104 (1986), pp. 102-5]) contrasts his 'humble' hillock with Ulysses' \softline
'prideful' mountain [verse 133], looks out upon this valley full of fireflies.  This peaceful scene \softline
lulls many readers into a sort of moral exemption for Ulysses; if he looks so pleasant, how can he \softline
be seen as sinful?  In fact the distancing effect of the simile makes Ulysses seem small and \softline
relatively insignificant.  We can imagine how he might feel, told that he had been compared to a \softline
firefly.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Many readers are rightly reminded of the previous simile involving a rustic (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lo villanello}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) \softline
at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.7-15.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the flames as reminiscent of the Epistle of James (James 3:4-6) see Richard Bates \softline
and Thomas Rendall ("Dante's Ulysses and the Epistle of James," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  107 [1989], pp. \softline
33-44) and Alison Cornish ("The Epistle of James in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  26," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Traditio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  45 [1989-90], pp. 367-79): 'Behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are driven by fierce winds, yet are \softline
turned about with a very small helm, wherever the steersman pleases.  Even so the tongue is a \softline
little member, and boasts many things.  Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles!  And the \softline
tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue among our members, that it defiles the whole \softline
body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell.'  Pietro di Dante was the \softline
first to cite this passage in connection with Dante's description of the flames here (Pietro1, comm. \softline
to vv. 31-33), and also refers to it in both later redactions of his commentary.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The second Ulyssean simile describes the flame-wrapped appearance of Ulysses in \softline
terms of Elijah's fiery ascent to Heaven.  Perhaps the first extended discussion of the biblical text \softline
behind the passage was offered by Margherita Frankel ("The Context of Dante's Ulysses: the \softline
Similes in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  104 [1986]), pp. 110-16, who argues that, while Elijah \softline
is seen as antithetical to Ulysses (see Anthony K. Cassell, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Fearful Art of Justice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984], pp. 88-93), Dante is also seen as related to the \softline
negative aspect of Elisha (his pride in taking on the prophet's mantle) -- see II Kings 2:9-12.  She \softline
is answered by Luisa Ferretti Cuomo ("La polisemia delle similitudini nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  \softline
Eliseo: un caso esemplare," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Strumenti critici}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 n.s. [1995], pp. 105-42) who regards Elisha as \softline
only a positive figure of Dante, similarly accepting his role as successor prophet.  For the same \softline
view see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1969), p. 117.  See also Kablitz ("Il canto di Ulisse [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI] agli occhi dei commentatori \softline
contemporanei e delle indagini moderne," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [2001], pp. 74-84), who \softline
also argues against Frankel's interpretation, but seems unaware of Ferretti Cuomo's work.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Elisha was avenged by the bears in that the forty-two children who mocked his prophetic \softline
calling, addressing him as 'Baldy' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 calve}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), were attacked and lacerated by two bears (II Kings \softline
2:23-24).  For the biblical resonance of this scene see Paola Rigo, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Memoria classica e memoria \softline
biblica in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Olschki, 1994), pp. 51-54.  Dante refers to this incident in one of his \softline
'political epistles' (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.8-12): }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.16.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist's excitement at the prospect of seeing Ulysses is evident (Ulysses \softline
has not been identified yet, but the poet seems to be taking a liberty in allowing his character to \softline
fathom who is about to appear).  In his reckless abandon to gain experience of this great sinner, \softline
he resembles Ulysses himself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's point seems to be that each of the flame-enclosed sinners is covered by the \softline
external sign of their inner ardor, their longing to captivate the minds of those upon whom they \softline
practiced their fraudulent work.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Almost all commentators point to the passage in Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Theb}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.429-432) that \softline
describes the immolation of the corpses of the two warring brothers, Eteocles and Polynices, \softline
whose enmity was the root of the civil war in Thebes and is manifest now even in their death, as \softline
the smoke from their burning bodies will not join.  Among the early commentators only Pietro di \softline
Dante (Pietro1, comm. to vv. 52-56) noticed that the same scene is reported in similar ways in \softline
Lucan as well (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.551-552).  Some dozen or more modern commentators, from Venturi on, \softline
have also done so.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ulysses and Diomedes are clearly indicated as suffering the punishment of God for \softline
their fraudulent acts; yet this indictment has not kept readers from admiring them -- or at least \softline
Ulysses.  Perhaps the central problem in the large debate that has surrounded Dante's version of \softline
the Greek hero in the last century and a half is how sympathetically we are meant to respond to \softline
him.  To put that another way, what is the nature of Ulysses' sin, and how urgently is it meant to \softline
govern the reader's sense of his worth?  And a further complication is of more recent vintage: \softline
what should we make of the at least apparent similarity between Ulysses and Dante himself?  \softline
Chiavacci Leonardi has made a useful distinction between the two essential attitudes that 
distinguish divergent readings of the undoubtedly heroic figure (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno, con il commento di A. \softline
M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: Mondadori, 1991], p. 762): (1) Ulysses is marked by greatness; he is unfortunate \softline
but guiltless; (2) he is characterized by the sin of pride, like Adam.  For an example of the first \softline
view see Francesco De Sanctis in 1870: Dante 'erects a statue to this precursor of Christopher \softline
Columbus, a pyramid set in the mud of hell' (Francesco De Sanctis, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Storia della letteratura \softline
italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 4th ed. [Bari: Laterza, 1949 (1870)], pp. 201-2).  For similar views see Benedetto Croce \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La poesia di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 2nd ed. [Bari: Laterza, 1921]), p. 98, and Mario Fubini ("Il peccato \softline
d'Ulisse" and "Il canto XXVI dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il peccato d'Ulisse e altri scritti danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Milan: Ricciardi, 1966]), pp. 1-76.  Attilio Momigliano (comm. to  XXVI.64-69) throws all \softline
caution to the wind.  He complains that the first 63 verses of the canto are too dry and erudite.  \softline
Now that Ulysses is on the scene, we breathe the air of true and enthusiastic poetry.  \softline
'Appearances notwithstanding,' he says, 'Dante not only does not condemn the fraudulent acts of \softline
Ulysses and Diomedes, he exalts them.'  Among contemporaries, Lino Pertile is essentially in this \softline
camp ("Dante e l'ingegno di Ulisse," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1 [1979], pp. 35-65).  The negative \softline
view in modern discussions was enunciated clearly by Bruno Nardi ("La tragedia di Ulisse," in his \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la cultura medievale}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bari: Laterza, 1942], pp. 89-99).  See also Julius Wilhelm, "Die \softline
Gestalt des Odysseus in Dantes }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 G{\f2\u246\'f6}ttlicher Kom{\f2\u246\'f6}die,}{\plain \fs24 \f1 "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Deutsches Dante-Jahrbuch}{\plain \fs24 \f1  38 (1960), pp. \softline
75-93; Giorgio Padoan ("Ulisse 'fandi fictor' e le vie della sapienza. Momenti di una tradizione [da \softline
Virgilio a Dante]," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il pio Enea e l'empio Ulisse: Tradizione classica e intendimento \softline
medievale in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1977 (1960)], pp. 170-99); Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), pp. 114-23; Scott ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI: \softline
Dante's Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24 \f1  23 (1971), pp. 145-86; Iannucci ("Ulysses' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 folle volo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : the \softline
Burden of History," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1976]. pp. 410-45).  Recently a third 'school' has \softline
opened its doors, one that finds Ulysses less than totally admirable and yet associated with Dante, \softline
who presents himself, just beneath the lines of his text, as a trespassing voyager himself.  See \softline
Mazzotta ("Poetics of History: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Diacritics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [summer 1975], p. 41; Stierle \softline
("Odysseus und Aeneas: Eine typologische Konfiguration in Dantes }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina Commedia,}{\plain \fs24 \f1 " in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Das \softline
fremde Wort: Studien zur Interdependenz von Texten}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Festschrift f{\f2\u252\'fc}r Karl Maurer zum 60. \softline
Geburtstag}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Ilse Nolting-Hauff & Joachim Schulze [Amsterdam: B. R. Gr{\f2\u252\'fc}ner, 1988], pp. \softline
111-54); Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine "Comedy": Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1992], }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 passim}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ); Bloom ("The Strangeness of Dante: Ulysses and Beatrice," in \softline
his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Western Canon: The Books and the School of the Ages}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [New York: Harcourt Brace, \softline
1994], pp. 85-89).  For a rejoinder to the position of these critics see Stull and Hollander ("The \softline
Lucanian Source of Dante's Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  63 (1991 [1997]), pp. 43-52.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil lists the sins of the two heroes: the stratagem of the troop-hiding Trojan \softline
horse (with which Ulysses, if not Diomedes, is associated in Virgil, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II); Ulysses' trickery in \softline
getting Achilles to join the war against Troy, thus abandoning, on the isle of Scyros, his beloved \softline
Deidamia (as recounted in Statius's unfinished }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Achilleid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), who subsequently died of grief at the \softline
news of his death in Troy; the joint adventure in which they stole the Palladium, image of Athena, \softline
a large wooden statue, in return for which the horse served as a fraudulent peace-offering (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
II.163-169).  Those who, like Momigliano, believe that the fraudulent acts of Ulysses and \softline
Diomedes are exalted by Dante, should be reminded that Virgil, in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , is pretty hard on \softline
them.  Diomedes, for his part in the theft of the Palladium, is impious (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 impius}{\plain \fs24 \f1  -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.163), \softline
while Ulysses is called an 'inventor of crimes' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scelerum... inventor}{\plain \fs24 \f1  -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.164).  It seems more 
than likely that Dante would have shared Virgil's views of these matters.  For the recovery of the \softline
notion, widespread in the ancient commentators, that Ulysses is best described as 'astutus' (in the \softline
sense of possessing low cunning) see Richard Kay, "Two Pairs of Tricks: Ulysses and Guido in \softline
Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI-XXVII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1 (1980), pp. 107-24; John Ahern, \softline
"Dante's Slyness: The Unnamed Sin of the Eighth Bolgia," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Romanic Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  73 (1982), pp. 275-91.  For further discussion of the importance of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 astutia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to Dante's conception of Ulysses see Stull \softline
and Hollander, "The Lucanian Source of Dante's Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  63 (1991 [1997]), pp. \softline
49-50.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Sources for Dante's Ulysses are found nearly everywhere, so much so that one has a \softline
feeling that more are called than should be chosen: Virgil (Logan, "The Characterization of \softline
Ulysses in Homer, Virgil and Dante: A Study in Sources and Analogues," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annual Report of the \softline
Dante Society}{\plain \fs24 \f1  82 [1964], pp. 19-46; Padoan, "Ulisse 'fandi fictor' e le vie della sapienza. Momenti \softline
di una tradizione [da Virgilio a Dante]," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il pio Enea e l'empio Ulisse: Tradizione classica e \softline
intendimento medievale in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1977 (1960)], pp. 170-99; Thompson, \softline
"Dante's Ulysses and the Allegorical Journey," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  85 [1967], pp. 44-46; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Epic \softline
Journeys}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974], pp. 52-61); Ovid (Picone, "Dante, \softline
Ovidio e il mito di Ulisse," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24 \f1  43 [1991], pp. 500-16); Persius (Chierichini, "La III \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Satira}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Persio 'fra le righe' di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  11 [1998], pp. 95-103); Statius \softline
(Padoan, "Ulisse 'fandi fictor' e le vie della sapienza. Momenti di una tradizione [da Virgilio a \softline
Dante]," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il pio Enea e l'empio Ulisse: Tradizione classica e intendimento medievale in \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1977 (1960)], pp. 173-76; Hagedorn, "A Statian Model for Dante's \softline
Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  115 [1997], pp. 19-43);  Lucan (Stull and Hollander, "The Lucanian \softline
Source of Dante's Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  63 [1991 (1997)], pp. 1-52); Tacitus (Von \softline
Richthofen, "{\u191\'bf}Deriva de T{\f2\u225\'e1}cito el episodio atl{\f2\u225\'e1}ntico de Ulises (Dante, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , XXVI, 83 y ss.)?" \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studia in honorem prof. M. De Riquer}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Vol. I [Barcelona: Crema, 1986], pp.579-83); the \softline
Alexander cycle (Avalle, "L'ultimo viaggio di Ulisse," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  43 [1966], pp. 35-67; Von \softline
Richthofen, "La dimensi{\f2\u243\'f3}n atl{\f2\u225\'e1}ntica del Ulises y del Alejandro medievales en el contexto del mito \softline
her{\f2\u225\'e1}cleo gaditano," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Philologica hispaniensia in honorem Manuel Alvar}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Vol. III [Madrid: \softline
Gredos, 1986], pp. 423-34); as built on negative correspondences with Moses (Porcelli, \softline
"Peccatum linguae, modello mosaico, climax narrativa nel canto di Ulisse" [1991], in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuovi \softline
studi su Dante e Boccaccio con analisi della "Nencia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Pisa: Istituti editoriali e poligrafici \softline
internazionali, 1997], pp. 20-25); even as Pope Boniface VIII ( Sch{\f2\u228\'e4}ffer, "Ulisse e Papa \softline
Bonifazio: un divertimento tipologico" [unpublished paper written for a graduate seminar at \softline
Princeton, spring 1968 (in English)]).  There are of course many more.  For three Latin passages \softline
(from Cicero, Horace, and Seneca) that may have helped shape Dante's conception of Ulysses see \softline
Singleton (comm. to XXVI.90-120).  The last of these (from Seneca's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Moral Epistles}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
LXXXVI.7, which begins "Quaeris Ulixes ubi erraverit?" is translated as follows: 'Do you raise \softline
the question, "Through what regions did Ulysses stray?" instead of trying to prevent ourselves \softline
from going astray at all times?  We have no leisure to hear lectures on the question whether he \softline
was sea-tost between Italy and Sicily, or outside our known world (indeed, so long a wandering \softline
could not possibly have taken place within its narrow bounds); we ourselves encounter storms of \softline
the spirit, which toss us daily, and our depravity drives us into all the ills which troubled Ulysses.'  \softline
The first commentator to cite this passage, giving credit to Michele Scherillo for advancing it, was \softline
apparently Giuseppe Vandelli (to vv. 100-102).  Emilio Pasquini, who also cites it (in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e le \softline
figure del vero }{\plain \fs24 \f1 [Milan: Bruno Mondadori, 2001, pp. 265-67]), goes on to make an interesting 
observation: Petrarch, in a letter to Boccaccio of 1359, fairly obviously appropriates Dante's \softline
presentation of Ulysses (vv. 94-99) in order to portray the poet himself, seen as lacking loyalty to \softline
the family he left behind in Florence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the vast bibliography of work devoted to Dante's Ulysses, see Anthony K. Cassell, \softline
"'Ulisseana': A Bibliography of Dante's Ulysses to 1981," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italian Culture}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 (1981), pp. 23-45; \softline
Massimo Seriacopi, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 All'estremo della "Prudentia": L'Ulisse di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Rome: Zauli, 1994), pp. \softline
155-91.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Now that Dante knows that the flame contains Ulysses his ardor to hear him speak \softline
is nearly overwhelming.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Daniel J. Donno, "Dante's Ulysses and Virgil's Prohibition," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  50 (1973), \softline
pp. 26-37, for the notion that here Virgil actually speaks Greek (if not assuming the role of \softline
Homer, as some have argued) because of a fable, which Dante might have known, that had it that \softline
Diomedes, forced back into wandering when his home-coming is ruined by news of his wife's \softline
infidelity, went off to Daunia (Apulia?) and eventually died thereabouts.  Some of the birds that \softline
dwelled there became known as 'Diomedian birds.'  Their main trait was to be hostile to all \softline
barbarians and friendly to all Greeks (pp. 30-31).  On the basis of this fable, Donno argues, Virgil \softline
chooses to address Diomedes and Ulysses in Greek.  The argument may be forced, but it is \softline
interesting.  The passage is puzzling and its difficulty is compounded by what is found at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXVII.20, when Guido da Montefeltro says that he has heard Virgil speaking Lombard dialect to \softline
Ulysses.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil identifies himself as Ulysses' (and Diomedes') 'author.'  Now this is strictly \softline
true, since both of them appear (if rather unfavorably) in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Nonetheless, one can \softline
understand why some commentators, apparently spurred on by Torquato Tasso (see Campi{\u8219\'27}s \softline
comm. to vv. 79-81]), have imagined that Virgil is pretending to be Homer as he addresses \softline
Ulysses and Diomedes.  However, that he refers to his work as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 li alti versi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ('my lofty verses') \softline
probably connects with his earlier description of his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 'l'alta mia traged{\f3 \'58}a' (my lofty tragedy), \softline
at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX.113.  It seems most sensible to believe that Virgil is speaking whatever language he \softline
usually speaks.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 90-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ulysses' speech begins, like classical epic, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 in medias res}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (in the midst of the action, \softline
i.e., not at its beginning).  Dante would seem to be portraying him as the author of his own self-celebrating song, a 'mini-epic,' as it were.  He makes it sound as though staying with Circe, the \softline
enchantress, were less culpable than it probably was, in Dante's eyes.  His next gesture is to boast \softline
that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 he}{\plain \fs24 \f1  had come to Gaeta before Aenas did, which city Aeneas names after his dead nurse, who \softline
died and was buried there (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.2).  (Castelvetro, always one to find fault with Dante, \softline
complains that it is not verisimilar for Ulysses to know these things from the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVI.91-93).  Thus does Ulysses put himself forward as a rivalrous competitor of Virgil's hero.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ulysses' aim, to discover the truth about the world and about mankind, sounds \softline
acceptable or even heroic to many contemporary readers.  When we examine the prologue to this \softline
thought, in which he denies his family feeling for Telemachus, Laertes, and Penelope in order to \softline
make his voyage, we may begin to see the inverted parallelism to the hero whom he would 
emulate and best, Aeneas, loyal to Ascanius, Anchises, and Creusa.  If Ulysses is venturesome, \softline
Aeneas is, as Virgil hardly tires of calling him, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pius}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a 'family man' if ever there was one.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   He and his crew of aging, tired sailors head out across the Mediterranean from \softline
Italy and reach the gates of Hercules, the very sign, even as Ulysses reports it, of the end of the \softline
known world.  While Dante does not refer to it (nor to the previous voyages of Marco Polo), a \softline
number of recent commentators speculate that he was aware of the voyage of the Vivaldi brothers \softline
in 1291.  They, in search of India, sailed out through the Strait of Gibraltar, having passed Spain \softline
and Africa, and were never heard from again.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-113.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is a commonplace in the commentaries to believe that the opening words of \softline
Ulysses' speech to his men reflect the first words of Aeneas to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  men (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.198).  Several, \softline
however, also refer to the similar passage in Lucan (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.299), but without making any further \softline
case for Lucan's greater appositeness here.  Stull and Hollander ("The Lucanian Source of Dante's \softline
Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  63 [1991 (1997)]), pp. 8-12, argue that Caesar's infamous words to his \softline
men, urging them to march on Rome, are cited far more precisely: the phrase 'che per cento milia / \softline
perigli' (through a hundred thousand perils) mirrors nearly exactly Lucan's 'qui mille pericula' \softline
(through a thousand perils) except for the added touch that Ulysses is even more grandiloquent \softline
than Lucan's florid Julius.  The result is fairly devastating to all those who argue for a positive \softline
valence for Dante's Ulysses, which is close to impossible to assert if the essential model for the \softline
hero is Julius Caesar, portrayed in Lucan as the worst of rabble-rousing, self-admiring leaders, \softline
here at the moment that begins the civil war that will destroy the Republic.  For Lucan, and for \softline
Dante, this is one of the most terrible moments in Roman history.  Stull and Hollander explore a \softline
series of resonances of Lucan's text in this canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ulysses' final flourish not only won over his flagging shipmates, it has become a \softline
rallying cry of Romantic readers of this scene, from Tennyson to Primo Levi.  What can be wrong \softline
with such desires, so fully human?  Alessandra Colangeli, a student at the University of Rome, \softline
suggested, after she heard a lecture on this canto on 10 March 1997, that Ulysses' words seemed \softline
to echo those of the serpent in the Garden to Adam and Eve, promising that, if they were to eat \softline
the forbidden fruit, they would become like gods, knowing good and evil (Genesis 3:5).  For a \softline
similar if more general view of Ulysses as the tempter see Anthony Cassell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Fearful Art of \softline
Justice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1984]),  p. 86.  Since Adam's later words to Dante \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.115-117) rehearse both the scene in the Garden and Ulysses' transgression, the eating \softline
from the tree and the trespass of an established limit, the association has some grounding in \softline
Dante's text.  Ignazio Baldelli ("Dante e Ulisse," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24 \f1  50 [1998], pp. 358-73) is the \softline
latest to argue that the speech is the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 locus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Ulysses's fraudulent counsel, since he, anticipating \softline
the reckless adventure of the Vivaldi brothers, urges his men to go beyond the known limits in \softline
search of experience.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Gustavo Vinay ("Dante e Ulisse," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nova Historia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1960], pp. 5-6), points out that these \softline
verses echo the opening of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : 'All men naturally desire knowledge' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.i.1).   His \softline
insight gives support to those who have argued that Ulysses is staged as a precursor, as it were, of \softline
the venturesome younger Dante, in whose more mature view a number of positions put forward in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  have become something of an embarrassment.  For such opinions see Luigi Valli \softline
("Ulisse e la tragedia intellettuale di Dante," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La struttura morale dell'universo dantesco}{\plain \fs24 \f1  
[Rome: Ausonia, 1935], pp. 26-40); Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: \softline
Princeton University Press, 1969), pp. 114-18; "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: Cato's Rebuke and Dante's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scoglio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  52 [1975], pp. 348-63; Freccero (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Rachel \softline
Jacoff [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986], pp. 188-90); Gagliardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La tragedia \softline
intellettuale di Dante: Il "Convivio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Catanzaro: Pullano, 1994], pp. 330-32), resuscitating Valli's \softline
views (his title derives from Valli's). \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ulysses' summary of the result of his speech is a masterpiece of false modesty.  \softline
Once he has uttered his words, his exhausted companions are ready for anything.  We now \softline
perhaps notice that one of his key words is 'little,' one mark of a speaker who masks his pride in \softline
false humility: his reduced company of shipmates is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 picciola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (v. 102); so is the time left his men \softline
on earth (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 picciola}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , v. 114); and now his oration is also but a little thing (v. 122), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 picciola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  used \softline
one more time, a total of three times in 21 verses.  Ulysses is, in modern parlance, a con artist, \softline
and a good one, too.  He has surely fooled a lot of people.  Rosalma Salina Borello ("Modelli di \softline
scissione e duplicazione nel canto XXVI dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi di letteratura, critica e linguistica \softline
offerti a Riccardo Scrivano}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Rome: Bulzoni, 2000]), p. 17, shows a similar understanding of \softline
Ulysses' use of these apparently self-deprecating words. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   His men, his 'brothers,' now show their real relationship to Ulysses: it is an \softline
instrumental one.  They are his oars.  As Carroll suggests in his commentary, 'Is it not possible \softline
that this wild adventure is narrated as the last piece of evil counsel of which Ulysses was guilty' \softline
(Carroll, comm. to XXVI.90-142).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The five-month voyage, the ship's stern to the east (the site of sunrise, perhaps \softline
the most familiar medieval image for Christ), occupies three tercets.  Ulysses, abetted by his \softline
rowers, has stormed Olympus.  They are the first mortals to see the mount of purgatory since \softline
Adam and Eve left it.  God's punishment does not wait long to overcome them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For an attempt to generate a new form of the adjective, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 arto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (narrow),  instead of \softline
the widely accepted }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (deep), see Guglielmo Gorni ("I }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 riguardi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Ercole e l'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 arto passo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di \softline
Ulisse," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1 [2000]), pp. 54-58.  The possibility that this the better \softline
reading is gainsaid by the fact that there is no instance of this form in the manuscripts nor in the \softline
commentary tradition.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a possible source of this verse in the Bible (John 16:20) see Fredi Chiappelli ("Il \softline
colore della menzogna nell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  18 [1989]), p. 123: 'You shall \softline
weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice; and you shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be \softline
changed to joy.'  For another, perhaps more apt, see the commentary of Durling and Martinez \softline
(New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), p. 414, citing James 4:9: 'Be afflicted, \softline
and mourn, and weep: let your laughter be turned to mourning, your joy to heaviness.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 137-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The whirlwind is frequently associated with God's power used in punishment.  \softline
See, among others, Cassell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Fearful Art of Justice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Toronto: University of Toronto Press, \softline
1984]), pp. 90-92.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The final image of Ulysses' narrative is based, as a commentator as early as \softline
Guido da Pisa (comm. to XXVI.136-142) realized, on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.116-117, where Virgil describes \softline
the only ship in Aeneas's flotilla to be destroyed in the storm at sea: '... but a wave whirls the ship, \softline
driving it three times around in the same place, and then a sudden eddy swallows it up in the sea.'  \softline
The echo is probably not without consequence for our view of the would-be hero Ulysses: 'The \softline
ship in point is that which carried the Lycians and faithful Orontes and which goes down within \softline
sight of the land that would have saved its sailors, as does Ulysses' ship.  It is a ship of the \softline
damned.  Aeneas, in his piety, is the hero; Ulysses, in his heroicness, is the failure' (Hollander, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969], p. 121).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The final verse of the canto seems also to have a classical antecedent (one not \softline
previously noted), the final verses of the seventh book of Statius's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  There the seer \softline
Amphiaraus, the first of the 'seven against Thebes' to die in that civil war, plunges into a chasm in \softline
the earth only to have the land then close back in above him (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Theb}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.821-823): 'and as he sank \softline
he looked back at the heavens and groaned to see the plain meet above him, until a fainter shock \softline
joined once more the parted fields and shut out the daylight from Avernus' (trans. Mozley).  Dante \softline
has referred to Amphiaraus's descent into hell at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX.31-36.  If he is thinking of it here, it \softline
would call to mind still another pagan hero who may serve as a model for Ulysses' rash voyage \softline
and entombment.  (Such a view, it is remarked belatedly, has a precursor in Giuseppe Velli's \softline
identical recovery of this source ["Dante e la memoria della poesia classica," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annali della Facolt{\f3 \'42} \softline
di lettere e di filosofia della Universit{\f3 \'42} di Macerata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  22-23 (1989-90), p. 43].)\par
}}