{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 INFERNO CANTO 34}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first verse of the last canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (like the first verse of the last canto of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.1]) is in Latin.  Its first three words are identical to the first verse of a \softline
hymn of the True Cross composed by Venantius Fortunatus (sixth century) but the last, obviously, \softline
has been added by Dante.  Satan, still in the distance, is naturally not 'advancing' against Dante \softline
and Virgil, but the wind he emits might have made it seem that way as they approach him.  Satan, \softline
as we shall see, is immobile.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This is the only complete Latin verse in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , but see seven earlier Latin words or \softline
phrases (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.65, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.70, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.62, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.88, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.6, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.42, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.72).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-7.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'The Satanic mills' of William Blake may not reflect this passage, even as much as \softline
Blake read Dante, yet Dante's simile immediately presents Satan as a vast contraption doing its \softline
necessary work in the architect's plan for this infernal city.  We reflect that this was once the \softline
fairest of angels, now reduced, despite his awesome size, to mindless iteration of his breath.  Joan \softline
Ferrante speaks of 'Lucifer, who emits no sound but sends forth a silent and freezing wind of hate, \softline
a parody perhaps of the love-inspiring tongues of flame brought to the Apostles by the Holy \softline
Spirit' (The Relation of Speech to Sin in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  87 [1969], p. 38).  As \softline
Bosco/Reggio suggest, it is not without reason that Dante compares Lucifer to a machine (comm. \softline
to XXXIV.28-57).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Commentators occasionally remark that Dante has here forgotten the fact that \softline
insubstantial Virgil, a shade, would give Dante no shelter at all.  The 'rules' of the poem overrule \softline
the 'rules' of even his own physics if and when he chooses.  E.g., Virgil picks Dante up and carries \softline
him at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.124-125 and XXIII.37.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.34-36.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab An observation of a Princeton student, Julia Salzman '02, is worth recording: here Dante \softline
does not move behind Virgil out of fear, but only to protect himself from the wind.  His progress \softline
is evident -- but Satan will nonetheless cause him considerable fear in a moment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Since Tommaseo in 1837 (comm. to vv. 10-12) commentators have cited, for this \softline
verse, Aeneas's words as he tells the story of Laoco{\f2\u246\'f6}n (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.204): 'horresco referens' (I shudder \softline
merely to tell it).  In the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  two serpents are moving toward the priest to kill him; here, the \softline
Serpent is being approached by Virgil and Dante.  The differing context is eventually reassuring, \softline
but the protagonist is, for the last time in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , filled with fear.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 11-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the fourth time in Cocytus the fact that we have crossed a boundary is made \softline
clear only by the fact that sinners are now punished in a different posture.  This last realm is \softline
named, of course, for Judas, who betrayed his rightful Lord, Jesus Christ.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sinners here are frozen inside the ice, as though tossed into it helter-skelter \softline
before it froze and now stuck in their various postures eternally, like straw caught in molten glass \softline
in the artisan's shop and now fastened in that glass, a lasting imperfection in it.  Their postures are \softline
horizontal (whether face-down or supine we cannot tell -- perhaps both), vertical (both head-up \softline
and head-down), or bent in two.  We eventually realize that in this zone we will not learn the \softline
identity of any of these sinners, a situation that may remind us of the anonymity that was insisted 
on for the Neutrals in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.49-51.  All of our attention is saved for Lucifer and the three \softline
special betrayers who are punished in his mouth.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 20-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil uses the classical name for the king of hell, as he has once before (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XI.65), and as he did in his own poem (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.269).  This is the last time that we will hear \softline
that name, as we are shortly to leave his 'kingdom.'  The phrase 'Ecco Dite' here surely echoes the \softline
phrase used of Jesus, before he is sentenced to death, 'Ecce homo.'  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XVII.1-3.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The last verse of this seventh and last address to the reader in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is treated by \softline
most commentators as a triviality, i.e., Dante assures the reader that he was indeed half-dead (as \softline
he has already said).  See, for example, Bosco/Reggo (comm. to vv. 25-27: 'The expression \softline
simply translates... that simple and banal phrase... in Italian, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mezzo morto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [half dead].'  Does \softline
Dante need to ask us to exercise our wits, if we have these, in order to understand }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 that}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ?  The \softline
portentousness of his declaration that he cannot write what he became because words would fail \softline
him cannot be squared with such an interpretation, words for which would fail no one.  Few, \softline
however, have come forward with more vital readings.  Gregorio Di Siena, in his commentary to \softline
these verses, quotes Torricelli, who says that at this moment Dante is passing from the state of \softline
death to the state of living in God's forgiveness.  Similarly, Ernesto Trucchi, who bridles at the \softline
terribly uninteresting readings put forward by previous commentators, claims that this is the \softline
moment in which, in the protagonist, the fear of hell becomes the fear of God.  More recently, in \softline
their commentary Durling and Martinez (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 1996, p. 544), propose the following: 'This moment is the culmination of the penitential imitation \softline
of Christ in the descent into hell, symbolically the pilgrim's death to sin, that is, the death of the \softline
"old man," leading to the reversal of direction from descent to ascent.'  They give credit to \softline
Freccero's essay 'The Sign of Satan' (in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Rachel Jacoff \softline
[Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986], pp. 167-79).  Whether we accept their \softline
interpretation or not, it does seem that they, and very few others, have responded with the kind of \softline
attention that the passage obviously calls for.  And now, for a lengthy and illuminating discussion, \softline
analyzing the moment as a parodic moment of mystical perception, see Giusppe Ledda (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La guerra \softline
della lingua}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 2002]), pp. 159-73.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 30-31.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That is, 'I am, proportionally, closer in size to a giant than a giant is to Lucifer.'  \softline
For the size of the giants, ca. 70 feet, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.58-66.  Let us, merely for \softline
purposes of calculation, agree that Dante was six feet tall.  The equation is simple: 6/70 = 70/x; x \softline
= 817.  Thus Lucifer is at the very minimum 817 feet tall.  Since both the giants and Satan are \softline
only halfway out of the ice, that leaves him as towering, from the waist up, over the ice by at least \softline
409 feet.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 35.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Satan, once of the highest order of angels, the Seraphim, has come a long way down.  \softline
It is worth noting that the only other sinner in hell referred to as raising his brow is prideful \softline
Farinata (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.45).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-38.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'wonder' that is Satan even now reminds us of his divine origin.  As many have 
noted, he stands before us as a parodic version of Christ crucified, even to his physical \softline
resemblance to the scene on Golgotha, in which Christ was upon a cross between two thieves.  \softline
For a representation of the three-headed Satan known to Dante from the mosaic on the ceiling of \softline
the Baptistry in Florence see Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 34-36).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 39-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The three colors of Satan's faces have caused much debate.  Almost all the early \softline
commentators equate them with the opposites of the three attributes of the trinitarian God, Love, \softline
Power, and Knowledge.  They associate red with anger, thus hatred (or impotence), yellowish \softline
white with impotence (or hatred), and black with ignorance.  As many note, these are not \softline
particularly convincing schemes, if their overall applicability seems acceptable.  John Freccero (in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Rachel Jacoff [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, \softline
1986]), pp. 170-77, attempts to develop an extended analogy between Dante's three-colored \softline
Satanic faces and the mulberry tree, whose fruit moves through time from waxen white, through \softline
red, to black, and thus mirrors the movement from first sin to death.  As things stand, the question \softline
remains an open one.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The six wings of Satan are his six wings as one of the angelic order of Seraphim \softline
(Isaiah 6:2); they are now not glorious in color but the wings of a giant bat.  Their resemblance to \softline
sails on a great ship are parodic, since Satan proceeds nowhere, but connect with images \softline
associated with Ulysses (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI) and the ship bringing the saved souls to the shore of \softline
purgatory (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 53-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido da Pisa (comm. to XXXIV.13-15) associates Satan's tears and mastication \softline
with a biblical text (Matthew 8:12), Jesus's words to the Centurion concerning those who fail to \softline
believe: 'and there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-67.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The three most gravely punished sinners of the poem are Judas Iscariot, who \softline
betrayed Jesus (founder of the Church), as well as Brutus and Cassius, who betrayed Julius \softline
Caesar (the first ruler of the Empire).  Judas is tortured more heavily, his back flayed ([see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXXIV.58-60] as was Christ's, on the way to Golgotha, bearing the cross).  Nonetheless, Brutus \softline
and Cassius, those stalwarts of the Roman Republic, which Dante honored so notably (see Robert \softline
Hollander and Albert Rossi, "Dante's Republican Treasury," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  104 [1986], pp. 59-82), are not treated a great deal better.  When we consider that another 'conspirator' against \softline
Julius, Cato the Younger, is found saved in the next canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I), we must surely be puzzled.  \softline
For Dante, despite his predominant hostility to him as a man (see William Stull and Robert \softline
Hollander, "The Lucanian Source of Dante's Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  63 [1991(1997)], pp. 33-43), Julius was nonetheless the first emperor of Rome, and thus served a divinely-ordained \softline
purpose.  For this reason, Brutus and Cassius are seen as betrayers of their rightful lord.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 68-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is now nightfall of the Saturday of Easter weekend; the journey to this point has \softline
lasted precisely twenty-four hours.  We have also reached the border of the midpoint of this \softline
canto, verse 69 of 139.  The next verse begins the action that will encompass another twenty-four-hour period, seventy verses that will extend through exactly as many hours as have been \softline
consumed by the journey up to now.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 71-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   When Satan opens his wings, Virgil, with Dante holding on to him, seizes the \softline
moment to grasp the animal-like flank of Satan.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   At the very center of the universe even Virgil, a shade, feels the pull of gravity as \softline
he tries to move back up toward the light.  See Freccero's overall view of the situation: 'In this \softline
spiritual universe, Satan falls with his immense weight to the center and the pilgrim rises to the \softline
Empyrean according to the universal law of gravity and grace, an extraordinary amalgam of \softline
Aristotelian physics and Augustinian spirituality' ("Dante's Cosmos" [Bernardo Lecture Series, \softline
No. 6; Binghamton, N.Y.: CEMERS, 1998], p. 3).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The locution describing Virgil's changed direction, 'ov' elli avea le zanche' (where he had \softline
his shanks), has caused debate, some believing that the 'he' refers to Virgil himself, i.e., turned his \softline
head to where }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  legs had been; others, that he turned his head to where Satan's leg were.  Our \softline
translation follows Anna Hatcher and Mark Musa, who opt for Satan's legs ("Lucifer's Legs," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Publications of the Modern Language Association of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  79 [1964], pp. 191-99, and \softline
"Lucifer's Legs, Again," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  81 [1966], pp. 88-91), pointing out, among \softline
other things, that Dante's insertion of the pronoun 'elli' before the verb 'avea' makes it almost \softline
necessary to draw this conclusion, since he never else inserts a pronoun into a sequence of verbs \softline
without introducting a new subject of the verb; that is, if the line read '[Virgilio] volse la testa ov' \softline
avea le zanche,' Virgil would clearly be the implied subject of the second verb.  According to \softline
Hatcher and Musa, the 'elli' all but removes that possibility.  For the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 zanche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (shanks) see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.45.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Since Dante doesn't understand (see vv. 90-93) that he has reached the center of the \softline
universe and is being moved back upward toward the surface of the earth at the antipodes, he \softline
assumes that Virgil is going back up toward the ice of Cocytus.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is now 7:30 am (midway between 6:00 and 9:00, the first 'tierce,' or three-hour \softline
period, into four of which the solar day was divided (6-9; 9-noon; noon-3; 3-6).  Since moments \softline
ago (v. 68) we had learned that it was 6:00 pm in Jerusalem, how can this be?  For the first time in \softline
the poem Virgil tells time by the sun, and not the moon; and he tells it by the position of the sun in \softline
purgatory, twelve hours ahead of Jerusalem (where it is currently 7:30 pm).  We are leaving hell \softline
behind.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Even though the travelers have to traverse an enormous distance in seventy lines, \softline
thirty-nine of them (vv. 88-126) are devoted to their new situation, Dante's three questions, and \softline
Virgil's responses.  The setting is a space on the convex side of the ice of Cocytus, i.e., on its far \softline
side.  The only remaining evidence of the infernal core is offered by the legs of Lucifer, sticking \softline
up through the crust of the area that contains the rest of him.  We are on the other side of the ice, \softline
and there is nothing more by way of constructed space to catch our eye.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante wants to know why he no longer sees the ice, why Lucifer is 'upside down,' and \softline
how it can already be morning.  Some of Virgil's explanations have already been adverted to.  He \softline
also explains that they are now under the southern hemisphere of the world above, not the \softline
northern, where Christ was put to death and whence they had begun their descent.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's final words in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  create, as it were, the foundation myth of sin: \softline
how it established itself in the world that God had made good.  Carla Forti ("Nascit{\f3 \'42} dell'Inferno 
o nascit{\f3 \'42} del Purgatorio: nota sulla caduta del Lucifero dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rivista di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 \softline
[1986], p. 246), refers to the passage as a 'genuine cosmological myth' and describes the fall of \softline
Lucifer as 'the first event that occurs in time' (p. 259).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is worth considering a similar passage in Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.151-162: Astraea, or justice, \softline
has just left the earth.  The battle of Phlegra ensues (about which we have heard in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.44-45, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.91-96, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.119-121); once the giants are destroyed, mother Earth, Gea, \softline
forms man in their image, if smaller, out of their gore.  But this new stock, too, is contemptuous \softline
of the gods.  Soon enough Lycaon (the 'wolf-man') will commit the first murder, one that will \softline
eventually lead to the murder of Julius Caesar (verse 201).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Here, in the final moments of the final canto, we learn of the first things to occur in \softline
terrestrial time: Satan fell from heaven and crashed into our earth (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.55-57).  To flee \softline
from him, all the land in the southern hemisphere hid beneath the sea and moved to the north of \softline
the equator, while the matter that he displaced in his fall rose up behind him to form the mount of \softline
purgatory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Over the years there have been efforts to find contradictions to this view of the earth's \softline
'geology' in Dante's later }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Questio de aqua et terra}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (1320).  Bruno Nardi, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La caduta di Lucifero e \softline
l'autenticit{\f3 \'42} della "Quaestio de aqua et terra}{\plain \fs24 \f1 " (Torino, S.E.I. [Lectura Dantis Romana]: 1959) \softline
[now in B. Nardi, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 "Lecturae" e altri studi danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. R. Abardo (Firenze: Le Lettere, 1990), \softline
pp. 227-65] made a case for the contradiction.  Freccero's review ("Satan's Fall and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaestio \softline
de aqua et terra}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  38 [1961], pp. 99-115) offered strong rebuttals to Nardi's main \softline
arguments.  The magisterial edition produced by Mazzoni (Dante Alighieri, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Opere minori}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. II \softline
[Milan-Naples: Ricciardi, 1979], pp. 691-880) convincingly presents the work as Dantean.  \softline
Pasquazi ("Sulla cosmogonia di Dante [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIV e }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Questio de aqua et terra}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]," in his \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 D'Egitto in Ierusalemme}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Rome: Bulzoni, 1985], pp. 121-56) makes a strong case for the absence \softline
of any significant contradiction.  For a study of the wider question see Giorgio Stabile, \softline
"Cosmologia e teologia nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : la caduta di Lucifero e il rovesciamento del mondo," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 (1983), pp. 139-73.  More recently, Zygmunt Baranski ("The Mystery of \softline
Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Questio de aqua et terra}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 In amicizia: Essays in Honour of Giulio Lepschy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Z.G. \softline
Baranski and L. Pertile [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Italianist}{\plain \fs24 \f1  17 (1997--special supplement)], pp. 146-64) also argues \softline
for authenticity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Along a passage in the rock through the space contained between the floor \softline
formed by the convex side of Cocytus and the underside of the earth above, the travelers follow \softline
the sound of a stream.  It, many suggest, is the river Lethe, running down into hell filled with the \softline
sins now forgotten by all who have purged themselves of them (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII.127-130).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   There is no pausing for rest that now seems a waste of time, given the nearness \softline
of the light.  Looking through a crevice (the word in Italian is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pertugio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the same word used to \softline
describe the opening through which Ugolino could see the moon from his cell [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.22]) \softline
in the earth's surface, whence, we assume, comes the little stream that they are following, Dante is \softline
able to see a few stars in the firmament above him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In a single verse the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  concludes.  And in this line both Virgil and Dante \softline
actually step out of hell, and now can see the full expanse of the dawn sky, filled with stars.  Both \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  will also end with the word 'stars' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stelle}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), the goals of a human sight 
that is being drawn to God.  There is no doubt as to the fact that even }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ending in \softline
happiness of this kind, is a comedic part of a comedic whole.\par
}}