{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 31}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-6.}{\plain \fs24   The reader -- at least on a second reading -- may admire Dante's insistence on his \softline
authorial freedom in not marking the border between Malebolge and the ninth Circle at the canto's \softline
edge.  Instead, with another classical simile (and Momigliano, comm. to vv. 4-6, notes the large \softline
numbers of classical allusions sprinkled through Cantos XXVIII-XXXI), he delays the transition \softline
until verse 7.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Virgil's rebuke in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXX.130-132 had both caused Dante embarrassment and \softline
supplied the antidote: his blush of shame (which reassured Virgil of his charge's moral \softline
development).  The most likely source for Dante's reference to the lance of Achilles, which had \softline
the magical property of curing with a second touch the very wound that it had caused, is }{\plain \fs24 \i Remedia \softline
amoris}{\plain \fs24  I.43-44: 'The Pelian spear [in Dante's understanding, the spear of Peleus?] that once had \softline
wounded his enemy, the son of Hercules [Telephus], also brought comfort to the wound,' a tale \softline
presented as being of somewhat dubious provenance, as another one of those pagan yarns ('so I \softline
have heard it told').  For some of the problems associated with this text see Singleton{\u8219\'27}s \softline
commentary (to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXI.5).  Ovid in fact refers to the spear given by Chiron, the centaur (see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XII.71), who lived on Mt. Pelion, to Achilles himself.  At least one other medieval poet \softline
before Dante, Bernard de Ventadour, had referred to the weapon as belonging first to Peleus.  \softline
Dante knew that Peleus was the father of Achilles, from, if nowhere else, Statius, }{\plain \fs24 \i Achilleid}{\plain \fs24  I.90.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The word }{\plain \fs24 \i mancia}{\plain \fs24  in v. 6 has caused debate.  Most commentators believe it merely means \softline
'gift' (in modern Italian, the tip, e.g., for a waiter); some, following Andr{\f1\u233\'e9} P{\f1\u233\'e9}zard (e.g., \softline
Bosco/Reggio, comm. to verse 6) believe it comes from chivalric custom, the sleeve (}{\plain \fs24 \i manica}{\plain \fs24 ) that \softline
a lady might present to her knight if he won his joust.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 7-13.}{\plain \fs24   The departure from Malebolge and arrival in the penumbral murk of the last }{\plain \fs24 \i bolgia}{\plain \fs24  \softline
is anything but dramatic.  Here nothing is distinct until Dante hears a horn-blast.  We shall \softline
eventually learn that this is sounded by Nimrod (verse 77).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 16-18.}{\plain \fs24   The reference to the }{\plain \fs24 \i Chanson de Roland}{\plain \fs24 , a text that, Giovanni Cecchetti reminds \softline
us, Dante knew in a form probably most unlike anything we read today ("}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXI," }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura \softline
Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24  6 ([supplement] 1990, p. 409), is the reader's first sure sign that we are in the \softline
realm of treachery, not mere 'simple fraud.'  As John Scott points out ("Treachery in Dante," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in the Italian Renaissance: Essays in Memory of Arnolfo B. Ferruolo}{\plain \fs24  [Naples: Societ{\f2 \'42} \softline
Editrice Napoletana, 1985]), pp. 29-30, for most medieval readers there was perhaps no act of \softline
worse betrayal than that of Ganelon (punished in the next canto, }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXII.122), whose \softline
treacherous act, in 778, was directed against Charlemagne, the future emperor (crowned in Rome \softline
on Christmas Day in 800) and future saint (canonized in 1165, exactly one hundred years before \softline
Dante's birth); he betrayed Charlemagne's rear guard to the Saracen invaders.  Roland blew \softline
Oliphant, his horn, too late to bring back Charlemagne and his troops, miles distant, in time to \softline
save his part of the army, all of whom were slaughtered at Roncesvalles by the Saracens.  \softline
Reminded of that blast, we know we are among the treacherous.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The parallels set up by the scene are interesting.  If Nimrod plays the role of Roland, his \softline
horn-blast is timely enough to prevent the entrance of the 'invaders,' Dante and Virgil, but equally \softline
ineffectual.  There is an 'emperor' in this scene, too, 'lo 'mperador del doloroso regno' (the \softline
emperor of the the woeful kingdom), Satan (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIV.28).  And Nimrod's blast is meant to 
warn the Satanic forces of the advent of the enemy, as Roland's was.  Who is the Ganelon of the \softline
scene?  Antaeus, who will 'betray' his lord by helping Dante and Virgil descend into Satan's \softline
stronghold.  If all these inverse parallels work, we have to add another: Dante and Virgil are the \softline
Saracens in this series of analogies by contrary.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-27.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's confusion, as he peers through the mist, causes him to take giants for \softline
towers.  If we ever come to believe, as very few do, that Cervantes had read Dante, this scene will \softline
serve as one of the strongest pieces of evidence, since Quijote makes the obverse mistake, taking \softline
windmills for giants.  For the medieval works on optics that lie behind the description of Dante's \softline
misperceptions here, see Peter Dronke ("The Giants in Hell," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante and Medieval Latin \softline
Traditions}{\plain \fs24  [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986]), p. 36.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28-33.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil, as gently and reassuringly as he can, prepares Dante to behold the giants.  \softline
As the guardians of this zone of Hell, as the most proximate servants of Satan, as it were, the \softline
giants are seen to represent the sin of pride.  That is how Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to verse \softline
31) saw them centuries ago: 'Gigantes figurative pro superbis accipiuntur' (The giants are to be \softline
figuratively understood as those who are prideful).  And that is how John Scott sees them today \softline
("Treachery in Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in the Italian Renaissance: Essays in Memory of Arnolfo B. \softline
Ferruolo}{\plain \fs24  [Naples: Societ{\f2 \'42} Editrice Napoletana, 1985], p. 29).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 34-39.}{\plain \fs24   The second simile of the canto is without classical decoration.  It involves \softline
improving sight, whether because a mist gradually lifts or because a walker gets closer to the \softline
indistinct object he examines from afar.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 40-45.}{\plain \fs24   The third simile compares the looming giants with the towers of the fortified town, \softline
Monteriggione, a Sienese outpost situated on the road between Florence and Siena.  In the \softline
thirteenth century its defensive walls were supplemented by fourteen towers, each over sixty feet \softline
in height.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For the attempt of the giants to overthrow the Olympian gods, referred to obliquely here, \softline
see note at vv. 94-96.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 49-57.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's meditation on the handiwork of Nature, God's child (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XI.99-105), \softline
can only be taken seriously, by a modern reader, when one considers that, according to Genesis \softline
6:4, once 'giants walked the earth.'  Nature, as implementer of God's design, is 'more cautious and \softline
more just' because she now fashions her largest creatures without intelligence, thus better \softline
protecting humans.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-66.}{\plain \fs24   The anatomy of the giants, visible from only above their waists, since the the bank \softline
forms a sort of apron, or 'fig leaf' (}{\plain \fs24 \i perizoma}{\plain \fs24  -- see the word in Genesis 3:7 for them), is described \softline
from the head down, to their shoulders ('where men make fast their cloaks'), to their waists.  The \softline
giant's head, which resembles the bronze pine cone Dante might well have seen in Rome in 1301 \softline
in the Vatican, is about eleven feet in height.  Three Frieslanders, reputed to be among the tallest \softline
of men, standing on one another's shoulders, would have reached merely from the bank to the \softline
bottom of his locks, some twenty-two feet, if we allow the topmost Frieslander to reach up with \softline
an arm toward that hair.  This leaves a foot or two of neck unmeasured.  Further, Dante himself, 
measuring by eye, thinks that the distance from the bank to the giant's shoulders is some thirty \softline
spans (the space covered by an outstretched hand), also some twenty-two feet.  Dante indicates \softline
that the giant is about thirty-five feet tall measured from the waist, his mid-point, and thus some \softline
seventy feet in all.  One senses his amusement at the reader who will do this calculation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 67.}{\plain \fs24   The garbled speech that issues from Nimrod's mouth has caused a veritable orgy of \softline
interpretive enthusiasm.  (The reader should be aware that we are not at all sure about what these \softline
words looked like when they left Dante's pen; as nonsense, they may have caused more scribal \softline
confusion than others.  Hence, any attempt to 'construe' them should be extremely cautious, which \softline
has certainly not been the case.  (Berthier, in his commentary to vv. 67-69, speaks of a poem of \softline
Rutebeuf, 'Le miracle de Th{\f1\u233\'e9}ophile,' in which the earlier French poet also uses unintelligible words \softline
to represent demonic speech.)  Dante has variously been assumed to have known more Aremaic \softline
or Arabic or Hebrew than he likely could have, and to have deployed this arcane knowledge in \softline
creating a meaningful phrase.  For a review of various attempts to make these words 'make sense,' \softline
with bibliography, see Ettore Caccia, 'Raph{\f2 \'50}l ma{\f2 \'58} am{\f2 \'50}cche zab{\f2 \'58} almi' (ED.1973.4).  And see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  VII.1, where Plutus also speaks five garbled words.  While it is nearly certainly \softline
true that we are not meant to be able to understand Nimrod's words (that is the point Virgil \softline
makes, after all), it is nonetheless likely that they, like those of Plutus, should be seen as corrupted \softline
versions of words that do make sense.  'Raphel' can hardly fail to remind us of the name of the \softline
archangel Raphael, 'ma{\f2 \'58}' seems a version of the Italian word for 'ever' (or 'never'), 'am{\f2 \'50}cche' could \softline
be a series of simple words (}{\plain \fs24 \i a me che}{\plain \fs24 : 'to,' 'me,' 'that'), 'zab{\f2 \'58}' sounds like a slide into dialectical \softline
speech, and 'almi' is perfectly good Italian for 'holy,' 'divine.'  The point is not that these words \softline
make any sense; it is rather that they do not.  Like Plutus's outburst, they are meant to be \softline
understood as corrupted speech.  And, as was true in that case, they are intended to keep these \softline
intruders out of the place this guardian has been posted to guard.  See Alberto Chiari ("Canto \softline
XXXI," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 , dir. Mario Marcazzan [Florence: Le Monnier, 1967 \softline
(1962)]), p. 1107, who argues that Nimrod's cry is the product of anger and menace common to \softline
all infernal guardians.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab These five words may refer to St. Paul's desire that the Corinthians speak five words with \softline
understanding rather than ten thousand in tongues (I Corinthians 14:19), as was first noted by \softline
Andr{\f1\u233\'e9} P{\f1\u233\'e9}zard ("Le Chant des g{\f1\u233\'e9}ants," }{\plain \fs24 \i Bulletin de la Soci{\f1\u233\'e9}t{\f1\u233\'e9} d'{\f1\u233\'e9}tudes dantesques du Centre \softline
universitaire m{\f1\u233\'e9}diterran{\f1\u233\'e9}en}{\plain \fs24  7 [1958]), p. 59; he was supported by one commentator, Giacalone \softline
in 1968 (comm. to verse 69), and then by Kleinhenz ("Dante's Towering Giants," }{\plain \fs24 \i Romance \softline
Philology}{\plain \fs24  27 [1974]), p. 283n.  Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante and Paul's "five words with understanding}{\plain \fs24 ," \softline
Occasional Papers, No. 1, Center for Medieval and Early Renaissance Texts and Studies \softline
[Binghamton, NY: Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1992]) attempts to take this \softline
'program' into passages in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  and }{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For the importance to Dante of St. Paul, who does not appear as a personage in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 , see Angelo Penna and Giovanni Fallani, 'Paolo, San' (ED.1973.4); Giorgio Petrocchi, \softline
"San Paolo in Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante e la Bibbia}{\plain \fs24 , ed. G. Barblan (Florence: Olschki, 1988), pp. 235-48.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 69.}{\plain \fs24   That Dante refers to this fallen speech as 'psalms' (}{\plain \fs24 \i salmi}{\plain \fs24 ), even negatively, reminds \softline
the reader that Nimrod's words reflect the divine origin of language, if we hear it now in its \softline
postlapsarian condition.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 70-81.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's stinging remarks to Nimrod (which are in fact quite amusing) have drawn \softline
puzzled response from some commentators.  Why does Virgil address Nimrod, since the giant \softline
cannot understand him?  Or are his words meant only for Dante?  Some complain that it is like \softline
speaking to an animal for him to speak to this creature.  Precisely so.  And we humans do this all \softline
the time.  It matters not at all that Nimrod cannot understand.  The reader can.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Virgil treats Nimrod like a drunk at a New Year's Eve party, telling him to give over \softline
attempts at speech and to content himself with blowing his horn.  Referring to the giant's rage, he \softline
underlines the oppositional intent of his outburst; calling him 'creature of confusion' (}{\plain \fs24 \i anima \softline
confusa}{\plain \fs24 ), he probably alludes to the 'confusion of tongues' that followed in the wake of the \softline
building of the Tower of Babel.  Before dismissing Nimrod as unworthy of further speech, Virgil \softline
makes this association clear.  In Genesis Nimrod was not a giant, but 'a mighty hunter before the \softline
Lord' (Genesis 10:9).  It is probably to St. Augustine, who mentions him three times in }{\plain \fs24 \i De civitate \softline
Dei}{\plain \fs24  XVI as a giant, that we owe Dante's decision to do so as well.  The building of the Tower and \softline
the resultant 'confusion' of language (Genesis 11:1-9) was, for Dante, one of the defining \softline
moments in the history of human language, the 'linguistic fall' described there paralleling the fall of \softline
Adam and Eve.  See Arno Borst (}{\plain \fs24 \i Der Turmbau von Babel}{\plain \fs24 , 3 vols. [Stuttgart: A. Hiersemann, \softline
1957-60], vol. II, pp. 869-75), for Dante's place in the history of responses to the building of the \softline
tower.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Nimrod will be referred to by name twice more in the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XII.34; }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXVI.126), so that he is mentioned once in each }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24 .  For this phenomenon, words that \softline
appear a single time in each }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24 , see Hollander ("An Index of Hapax Legomena in Dante's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  106 [1988]), pp. 108-10.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 84-90.}{\plain \fs24   The second of the three giants whom we see in this canto (we shall hear of three \softline
others) will be identified shortly (v. 94) as Ephialtes.  Unlike Nimrod, too stupid to be dangerous, \softline
this one, bigger still and far more fierce, is capable of the harm that the poet feared in vv. 55-57.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 91-96.}{\plain \fs24   Ephialtes was one of the giants who attempted, by piling Pelion on Ossa, to scale \softline
Olympus and overthrow the gods.  He and his fellow rebels were killed by Jove at Phlegra (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XIV.58).  He is referred to by Virgil along with his twin brother Otus at }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid }{\plain \fs24 VI.582, but only \softline
as the (unnamed) twin adoptive sons of Aloeus, engendered in Iphimedia by Neptune.  Virgil \softline
names them at }{\plain \fs24 \i Culex}{\plain \fs24  234-235.  For the presence of Ephialtes in various classical texts, beginning \softline
with Homer, see Scartazzini, comm. to verse 94.  Tozer (1901) and Torraca (1905) both suggest \softline
that Dante might have read his name in Servius's comment on Georgics I.280.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 97-105.}{\plain \fs24   Dante wants to see Briareus because he has read about him in the (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . X.565-567): he has a hundred arms and hands and breathes fire from fifty mouths and breasts.  It is \softline
important to note that Virgil himself apologizes for this account: }{\plain \fs24 \i dicunt}{\plain \fs24 , he says, 'or so they say,' \softline
the same tactic that Dante has used when warning us against the excesses of pagan myth-making \softline
when he imports it to his own poem (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIX.63; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXI.4).  Dante, however, wants to \softline
have some fun at his fellow poet's expense.  Briareus, Virgil explains (like a host who does not \softline
want to produce a particularly embarrassing guest at a party), is }{\plain \fs24 \i way}{\plain \fs24  up ahead there, and he looks \softline
just like Ephialtes, anyway.  What Dante has made his }{\plain \fs24 \i auctor}{\plain \fs24  do is to apologize for including such \softline
unbelievable rot in the divine }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 , while allowing Virgil to escape the discomfort of actually \softline
having to gaze upon the 'normal,' Dantean version of a proper giant, human in everything but his 
size.  Most commentators do not perceive the humor of this moment.  However, for sense of \softline
Dante's playfulness here, see Andreoli in 1856 (comm. to vv. 98-99) and Trucchi in 1936 (comm. \softline
to vv. 97-99).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Not only is Antaeus a 'normal' giant (we see what Dante has gotten us to assent to by \softline
overruling 'excessive' gigantism -- this is a game played endlessly in }{\plain \fs24 \i Don Quijote}{\plain \fs24  -- an acceptance \softline
of 'normal' gigantism), but he is a relatively friendly one, unfettered, we assume, because he did \softline
not fight against the gods at Phlegra.  Satan never should have taken him on.  Nimrod is \softline
ineffective, but at least he }{\plain \fs24 \i tries}{\plain \fs24 ; Ephialtes has the right stuff; but this Antaeus is a total loser.  As \softline
soon as God knew he didn't need to bind him, Satan should have found a meaner giant.  The son \softline
of Neptune and Gea, Earth, Antaeus was invincible in combat so long as he remained in contact \softline
with earth.  Hercules, discovering this, was able to hold him free from the earth and kill him, \softline
crushing him in his hands.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 108.}{\plain \fs24   Ephialtes is angry, either because he thinks Virgil and Dante will have more success \softline
with Antaeus or because Virgil has said that Briareus looks even meaner than he.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 113-114.}{\plain \fs24   The size of Antaeus's upper body, not including his head, is seven ells, about \softline
twenty-two feet, thus roughly the same as Nimrod's.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 115-124.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil begins by referring to the battle of Zama in 202 B.C., where Scipio \softline
Africanus defeated Hannibal (revenge for the battle of Cannae in 216 -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVIII.9-11), \softline
thus successfully concluding the second Punic War, which had begun so badly.  Needless to say, \softline
this (for Dante and any Roman-minded reader) great victory is hardly of a comparable magnitude \softline
to that of a giant capturing a lot of lions.  Thus the reference to Zama offers a back-handed \softline
compliment to Antaeus, who killed his lions in the same place that Scipio defeated Hannibal.  \softline
Scipio's importance for Dante is mirrored in the fact that he reappears by name three times in the \softline
poem: }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXIX.117, }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . VI.53, }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.61.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Virgil finds himself in a difficult situation.  As was not the case with Ulysses, when Virgil \softline
could boast that he had written of his exploits (even if not very favorably, he }{\plain \fs24 \i had}{\plain \fs24  at least written \softline
of the Greek hero -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.80-82), he has not written about Antaeus at all.  To make \softline
matters worse, he }{\plain \fs24 \i did}{\plain \fs24  once mention a certain Antaeus, a soldier in Turnus's ranks, mowed down \softline
by Aeneas in his Achilles-like battlefield fury in }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  X.561.  And, still worse, this mention of \softline
an Antaeus who is merely a walk-on corpse in Virgil's poem precedes by only four lines Virgil's \softline
mention of Briareus (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 .XXXI.97-105).  And so here is a poet who has, \softline
intrinsically at least, insulted the giant whom he now wants to cajole.  What is he to do?  What he \softline
does is borrow from Lucan (of course only }{\plain \fs24 \i we}{\plain \fs24  know that he is accomplishing this chronologically \softline
impossible feat) in order to praise Antaeus.  It was Lucan, not Virgil, who told the tale of Antaeus \softline
the lion-killer (}{\plain \fs24 \i Phars}{\plain \fs24 . IV.601-602), and it was Lucan, not Virgil, who explicitly compared \softline
Antaeus favorably to Briareus, not to mention Typhon and Tityus (the two other giants of whom \softline
we are about to hear at v. 124).  See }{\plain \fs24 \i Phars}{\plain \fs24 . IV.595-597): Gea had more reason to boast of this \softline
gigantic son, Antaeus, than of the others, Typhon, or Tityus, or fierce Briareus; and she was \softline
merciful to the gods when she did not set loose Antaeus on the field at Phlegra.  (This detail offers \softline
the matter for Virgil's second instance of the greatness of Antaeus.)  It can hardly be coincidental \softline
that all four of the giants present in Virgil's speech here are also together in Lucan's text.  And so \softline
Virgil's two gestures toward Antaeus are both taken from Lucan.  It is an extraordinarily amusing 
moment; one can imagine how Dante smiled as he composed it.  Nonetheless, many of his \softline
commentators vehemently deny that this passage is ironic.  It is difficult to see with what justice \softline
they do so.  For what has Virgil really said to Antaeus?  'You killed a lot of lions right near the \softline
place where Rome won one of its greatest military victories; you didn't fight at the battle in which \softline
your brothers were killed by the gods.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 125-132.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i captatio benevolentiae}{\plain \fs24  has not been successful.  Antaeus still needs \softline
persuading.  Dante, Virgil tells him, can do what he didn't do: make Antaeus famous.  Perhaps \softline
Antaeus was a better reader of classical texts than some imagine; his lip was still curled with \softline
disdain after Virgil's praise had ended.  Fame is the spur; Antaeus bends and grasps Virgil, in a \softline
benevolent replay of his own death scene, when Hercules held him in }{\plain \fs24 \i his}{\plain \fs24  hands.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 136-141.}{\plain \fs24   The fourth and last simile of the canto refers to one of two towers (the shorter \softline
one, in fact, but the one that 'leans' the most) built in Bologna in 1109 and 1110.  Towers and \softline
giants have pride in common, and so the comparison is not without its moral reasons.  Its visual \softline
reasons are indisputably stunning, a tower that seems to be falling because a cloud is passing over \softline
it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Michelangelo Picone ("La torre della ragione: per un sonetto dantesco," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Carmina \softline
semper et citharae cordi. Etudes de philologie et de m{\f1\u233\'e9}trique offertes {\f2 \'42} Aldo Menichetti}{\plain \fs24 , {\f1\u233\'e9}d. par \softline
M.Cl. G{\f1\u233\'e9}rard-Zai et al. [Geneva: Slatkine, 2000], pp. 291-300) has now interpreted the 'allegory' \softline
of Dante's sonnet about the Garisenda tower of Bologna, number 51 in Barbi's collection of \softline
Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Rime,}{\plain \fs24  as follows: just as Dante looks at the smaller (and not the greater) of the two \softline
towers in Bologna, just so he looked at another lesser woman and not at Beatrice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 142-143.}{\plain \fs24   For the tradition of hell as a devouring mouth, reflected in these verses, see \softline
Sonia Gentili ("'Ut canes infernales': Cerbero e le Arpie in Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i I "monstra" nell'"Inferno" \softline
dantesco: tradizione e simbologie}{\plain \fs24  [Spoleto: Centro italiano di studi sull'alto medioevo, 1997]), \softline
pp. 177-82.  And for a larger, more speculative, view, one that holds that hell is programmatically \softline
modeled on the shape of the human body (with the last Circle as the anus), see Durling ("Deceit \softline
and Digestion in the Belly of Hell," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Allegory and Representation: Selected Papers from the \softline
English Institute, 1979-80}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Stephen A. Greenblatt [Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University \softline
Press, 1981], pp. 61-93).  There is a potential linguistic play in these lines ('al fondo che divora / \softline
Lucifero con Giuda'); given that in}{\plain \fs24 \i  Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXIV.61-63 it is Satan who 'devours' Judas, the \softline
lines almost ask to be misread as 'al fondo in cui divora / Giuda Lucifero.'  Benvenuto's gloss to \softline
these verses says almost as much: 'quia in centro putei stat fixus Lucifer qui devorat Judam' \softline
(because in the center of the pit Lucifer is fastened, devouring Judas).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab There has been much debate as to where the giants stand in relation to the floor of Hell.  \softline
Are their feet on the floor itself or do they stand on a ledge above it?  See }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXII.16-18 \softline
and the related note.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 144-145.}{\plain \fs24   No one in hell sticks around after work, neither angelic messenger (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . IX.100-103) nor co-operative monster (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVII.133-136).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Guiniforto, in his comment to this passage (vv. 136-145) suggests that Dante must have \softline
had a small boat in mind, the mast of which may be raised very quickly.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab An entire canto has been devoted to a transition from one circle to the next.  We realize, 
once all the exuberant poetic play has stopped, that we are on the lowest point in Dante's \softline
universe, the floor of hell.  From here, everywhere is up.\par
}}