{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 30}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-12.}{\plain \fs24   This is the first of two lengthy classical opening similes derived from the third, \softline
fourth, and thirteenth books of Ovid's }{\plain \fs24 \i Metamorphoses}{\plain \fs24 .  Dante's classical material in this first sally \softline
involves the matter of Thebes, his favorite example of the 'city of destruction' in ancient times.  \softline
Juno, jealous of Semele, daughter of Cadmus, founder of Troy, takes out her wrath on the city by \softline
destroying Semele herself (only referred to indirectly here in v. 3) and her sister, Ino, the consort \softline
of Athamas, king of Orchomenus.  Juno's revenge in this second instance is achieved by making \softline
Athamas go mad.  In his distemper he kills his son Learchus, thus causing Ino to leap with the \softline
other (Melicertes) into the sea (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . IV.512-530).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 13-21.}{\plain \fs24   The second tale is related to Troy, that other classical 'city of destruction.'  After \softline
the fall of the city, the widowed queen, Hecuba, was, according to Ovid's account in his thirteenth \softline
book, carried off by the Greeks.  When they stopped in Thrace, she witnessed the sacrifice of her \softline
daugher Polyxena on the tomb of Achilles and then, when she had gone to the sea for water to \softline
prepare the corpse for burial, found the body of her son Polydorus, murdered by the Thracian \softline
king, Polymnestor, washed up on the shore beside her.  At this she went mad, and began barking \softline
like a dog (}{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . XIII.404-406).  Finally, she killed Polymnestor, according to Ovid, by tearing \softline
out his eyes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 22-27.}{\plain \fs24   The completion ('vehicle') of each opening similetic comparison ('tenor') is only \softline
now put forward.  Reduced to madness, Athamas kills his own child, Hecuba, the king who had \softline
killed her son (}{\plain \fs24 \i Metam}{\plain \fs24 . XIII.558-564).  Nonetheless, they are less savage than the two bestial \softline
forms that now appear.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28-33.}{\plain \fs24   One of these two sinners attacks and bears off Capocchio, who had held our \softline
attention at the end of the last canto.  This new shade is thus associated with Athamas, acting out \softline
his maddened rage, and is identified by Griffolino, the other sinner we met in Canto XXIX, as \softline
Gianni Schicchi.  Where Capocchio had been scratching himself, he now gets his scabrous belly \softline
scraped by the ground as he is dragged off.  Among the modern commentators, Isidoro Del \softline
Lungo (comm. to vv. 31-33) was the first, in 1926, to study medieval medical treatises in order to \softline
explain that the rabidity of this set of sinners is associated with hydrophobia.  See also the \softline
important study of the canto (first published in 1953), with discussion of the relevance of the \softline
work of Bartholomaeus Anglicus, by Gianfranco Contini, }{\plain \fs24 \i Un' idea di Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Turin: Einaudi, \softline
1976)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , pp. 159-70.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Gianni Schicchi was a member of the Florentine Cavalcanti family and was renowned for \softline
his ability to impersonate others.  He was dead by 1280.  Commentators speculate that Dante \softline
would have heard tell of his impersonations while he was still a boy.  One particular case is \softline
detailed a few lines farther on (vv. 42-45).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-41.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Griffolino explains to Dante that the other furious shade is that of Ovid's Myrrha \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.298-502).  She, daughter of Cinyras, king of Cyprus, disguised herself, abetted by her \softline
nurse, as a willing young woman (her mother being absent) in order to sleep with her father.  In \softline
the development of the canto, she is at least formally in parallel with Hecuba (since Gianni plays \softline
the part of Athamas), but beyond their common femininity there is little to associate them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab We may speculate that all the Ovidian material of this canto has marginalized Virgil.  \softline
Indeed, he does not speak a word until v. 131.  This is the longest silence on his part since he \softline
entered the poem in its first canto; it is 169 lines since he last spoke at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.101.  For \softline
preceding long Virgilian silences see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.112-VI.93; XV.1-99; XVI.18-121.  In two cantos \softline
he speaks only a single verse (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.99 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.33).  However, the longest Virgilian \softline
silences in the poem await us.  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII is the first canto in the poem in which he does not \softline
speak a word (and he is silent between XXXI.134 and XXXIII.106, a total of 255 verses); \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV is the second and the longest (with Virgil silent between XXIII.15 and \softline
XXV.17, a total of 288 verses).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 42-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The story of Gianni Schicchi's impersonation of the dead and testmentless Buoso \softline
Donati in order to help the surviving Schicchi family members get an inheritance they feared they \softline
would otherwise lose delighted the early commentators, who take pleasure in repeating it.  \softline
Gianni's payment for himself was to will himself the best animal -- the lead mule -- of Buoso's \softline
herd.  Puccini's opera, bearing his name as its title, continues to purvey Gianni's tale.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Reading the last canto for the first time, we may have assumed that the tenth \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was devoted to detailing the punishment of a single form of falsification, alchemical \softline
deceptions, punished in a single way, by the scabs that cover the bodies of these leprous sinners \softline
(see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.58-66).  After reading Canto XXX we have learned that there is a total \softline
of four species of falsification, each punished by a particular disease.  The three species in this \softline
canto are as follows: impersonators (hydrophobia), counterfeiters of coin (dropsy), perjurors \softline
(fever).  Here we come to the second in this group, the counterfeiters.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the musical elements in the description of this sinner (he will find a name, \softline
Master Adam, at v. 61), see Iannucci (}{\plain \fs24 "Musical Imagery in the Mastro Adamo Episode," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Da \softline
una riva e dall'altra: Studi in onore di Antonio D'Andrea}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Dante Della Terza [Florence: \softline
Edizioni Cadmo, 1995], pp. 103-18}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  The lute, which resembles 'a pregnant guitar' (as a waggish \softline
student of music once insisted) was, in Dante's time, generally regarded as a 'serious' instrument, \softline
like David's harp, and thus associated with the 'right' kind of musical performance.  Iannucci \softline
points out (p. 114) that this is the only stringed instrument mentioned in hell.  Adam, who }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 looks \softline
like}{\plain \fs24 \f1  a lute, ends up sounding like a drum (v. 103), an instrument, as Iannucci argues, associated \softline
with such lower forms of musical amusement as public spectacles.  For the symbolic inversions in \softline
the musicality of this scene see Denise Heilbronn, }{\plain \fs24 "Master Adam and the Fat-Bellied Lute (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXX)," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  101 (1983), pp. 51-65}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dropsy, in which a main symptom is the retention of water, which distends parts \softline
of the body, was also characterized by terrible thirst.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-61.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Resentfully noting Dante's lack of punishment, the sinner identifies himself.  \softline
Master Adam, according to some commentators an Englishman, was in the employ of the Conti \softline
Guidi of Romena (in the Casentino, not far from Florence).  (We will hear more of this family in \softline
vv. 73-87.)  They convinced him to falsify the gold florin, stamped with the image of John the \softline
Baptist, the patron of Florence, by pouring gold of only 21 (and not 24) carats, a carat being one \softline
twenty-fourth of an ounce.  On the symbolic importance of money, as it is reflected in this canto, 
see Shoaf (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante, Chaucer, and the Currency of the Word}{\plain \fs24  [Norman, Oklahoma: Pilgrim Books, \softline
1983]),}{\plain \fs24 \f1  pp. 39-48.  Adam's crime was discovered and he was burned alive in Florence in 1281.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab His name almost inevitably reminds the reader of his namesake, the first sinner.  For \softline
discussion of the way in which this 'new Adam' is in fact a modern version of the first one, see \softline
Sally Mussetter,}{\plain \fs24 " }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXX: Dante's Counterfeit Adam," }{\plain \fs24 \i Traditio}{\plain \fs24  34 (1978), pp. 427-35.}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As many note, the language here again reflects that found in the Lamentations of Jeremiah.  \softline
See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.130-138.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Adam's memories of 'the green hills of home' torment him, only increasing his \softline
punishment.  What for the reader is a moment of pastoral escape from hellish thoughts is for him \softline
torment.  For a Virgilian source of the image see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.42, describing 'cool streams and \softline
gentle meadows.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Envy, often marked by the desire to see those who are well off suffering, rules \softline
Adam's heart.  He would rather see his employers punished than slake his thirst.  Fonte Branda, \softline
according to the early commentators, is the famous spring in Siena.  Later writers have argued for \softline
another, of the same name, in the vicinity of Romena.  However, that the earliest commentators \softline
do not refer to it probably seconds the notion that the more famous one is referred to here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido had died in 1281 and news of his location in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has reached Adam \softline
through one of the rabid impersonators who range the territory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Adam's 'impossible dream' is to be able to move an inch in a hundred years -- and \softline
even that is beyond him.  Were it not, Manfredi Porena (comm. to these verses) did the math and \softline
calculated that, at even this speed, it would take him 700,000 years to find Guido.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab That this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is half the circumference and breadth of the last one has given those who \softline
would like to establish the exact size of Dante's hell the two co-ordinates they think they need.  \softline
Such calculation is a temptation to be avoided.  (See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.8-9.)  Adam \softline
undercalculates the diameter, which is 3.5 miles, considerably.  We reflect that his dubious \softline
measurement is the result of his dropsied bulk and consequent laziness.  A half mile is hundreds of \softline
thousands of years of (for him impossible) movement.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The fact that Master Adam says that the circumference of the tenth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is eleven miles \softline
draws the numerologically minded Victoria Kirkham ("Eleven Is for Evil: Measured Trespass in \softline
Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegorica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 [1989], pp. 27-28, 36-37), to make the claim that this number \softline
here relates to eleven as the 'number of transgression' (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.10-15).  On the \softline
other hand, eleven here may merely be half of the twenty-two mentioned by Virgil in the \softline
preceding }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as being the number of miles of its circumference (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.8-9).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Adam's hatred of the Conti Guidi is understandable; his placing the entire blame on \softline
them for his own misdeeds is typical of certain sinners, always finding a cause for their failures in \softline
the hearts and minds of others.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Adam first identifies Potiphar's wife (Genesis 39:6-20), who, having failed to \softline
seduce Joseph, accused }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 him}{\plain \fs24 \f1  before Pharoah of attempting to seduce }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 her}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Then he identifies Sinon 
(as he is known from the second book of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), whose misrepresentations led to the \softline
destruction of Troy.  Both suffer from high fever, seen not as a symptom of other ailments, but as \softline
a disease in itself; both worked treacherously against a 'chosen people,' the Hebrews and the \softline
Trojans.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-103.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Angered by the words of Master Adam, Sinon's first gesture is to strike him on \softline
his taut paunch, which booms like a drum.  This act begins a series of exchanged insults, begun \softline
and ended by Adam.  Until the last in the series, each one occupies a single tercet (Adam's final \softline
flourish will occupy two).  As many who have written on this scene have reflected, Dante's \softline
technique here is modelled on the exchange of poetic insult found in the genre called }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  See \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.31-39.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Not only are these exchanges generally reflective of the tradition of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , this \softline
particular verse has been seen (e.g., Casini/Barbi's commentary to this verse in 1921) as \softline
rehearsing a particular }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , one between Cecco Angiolieri and Dante (whose sonnet, \softline
apparently the occasion for Cecco's, is lost).  Cecco's ('Dante Alighieri, s'i' so' bon begolardo') \softline
begins roughly as follows:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab Dante Alighier, if I'm a foolish bard,\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab I can feel your lance just behind my back;\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab If I'm out for dinner, you're there for a snack;\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab If I chew the fat, you but suck the lard.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For Virgil's presentation of Sinon's lie, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.152-159.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 126-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Adam's last words remind Sinon that, even if the counterfeiter is suffering from \softline
dropsy, his accuser has got a case of fever.  His last }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 riposte}{\plain \fs24 \f1  jibes at Sinon's thirst, which would \softline
lead him to the 'mirror of Narcissus,' i.e., a pool that would reflect his true, hideous self -- which \softline
image he would destroy out of thirst, in a sort of grubby version of the original myth.  As Kevin \softline
Brownlee pointed out, this reference begins the 'Narcissus program' in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which \softline
includes references to the myth in a number of passages, and in all cantos numbered XXX (}{\plain \fs24 "Dante \softline
and Narcissus [}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXX, 76-99]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  96 [1978], }{\plain \fs24 \f1 pp. 205-6).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 131-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's harsh rebuke here seems on the mark, certainly to Dante himself.  \softline
Dante's emphatic acceptance of it stands in clear contrast to his rejection of the similar rebuke in \softline
the last canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.4-12), where Virgil had not understood the cause of his staring into the \softline
ninth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bolgia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Here Dante has become an interested bystander (rather than a man with a mission), \softline
enjoying the back-and-forth argument between the two sinners (just as do we) because it is both \softline
violent and amusing.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is a remarkable simile (or 'pseudo-simile' on the grounds that it 'compares a \softline
thing, person, or emotion with itself' -- in the words of Eric Mallin (see }{\plain \fs24 "The False Simile in \softline
Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  102 [1984], }{\plain \fs24 \f1 p. 15).  (Mallin discusses this particular simile, \softline
pp. 28-31.)  Tozer's prior remark in his commentary to this verse (1901) is of interest: 'This is a \softline
conspicuous instance of an interesting class of similes -- viz. those drawn from mental experiences 
-- of which there are as many as thirty in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .'  The simile is difficult enough that a \softline
prose paraphrase may help to make its point clearer: 'As a man dreams of being harmed and of \softline
wishing he were only dreaming (which he in fact is), so did I, unable to speak, feel ashamed \softline
because I could not excuse myself -- while all the while my blushing was doing just that for me.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142-148.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil accepts Dante's unvoiced apology and warns him against future \softline
backsliding of this kind.  Berthier (comm. to XXX.130-132) cites from St. Bernard, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De ordine \softline
vitae}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , from a passage, he says, located 'before its middle': 'audire quod turpe est, pudori maximo \softline
est' (it is most shameful to give ear to vile things).\par
}}