{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 33}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-3.}{\plain \fs24   The complications of political intrigue lie behind the story that we are about to hear.  \softline
For a review, in English, see Singleton (comm. to XXXIII.17-18).  The main particulars are as \softline
follows.  Count Ugolino della Gherardesca (}{\plain \fs24 \i ca}{\plain \fs24 . 1220-1289) was of a Ghibelline family of Pisa.  In \softline
1275 he joined with the Guelph Visconti family in order to advance his own political ambitions, \softline
but failed to do so when his plans became known and he was banished.  He returned to Pisa and \softline
now joined with the Archbishop, Ruggieri degli Ubaldini (grandson of Ottaviano degli Ubaldini \softline
[Inf. X.120]), a Ghibelline, and conspired with him against Judge Nino Visconti, a Guelph, and, in \softline
Dante's eyes, a good man (we see him, on his way to salvation, in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . VIII.53).  In 1288 \softline
Ugolino and Ruggieri managed to force Nino to leave the city, thus allowing them a free hand.  At \softline
this point, however, Ruggieri decided to be rid of Ugolino, and had him accused of 'betraying' \softline
Pisa by giving some of its outlying castles to the Florentines and the Lucchesi (he had in fact been \softline
trying to negotiate a political advantage to Pisa in these dealings).  With that as an excuse, \softline
Ruggieri had Ugolino imprisoned in the summer of 1288, along with two sons and two grandsons \softline
(Dante has made the tale more pathetic by making all four of the children young -- but Ugolino \softline
was in his sixties when the five of them were imprisoned).  They were starved to death in \softline
February 1289.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Ugolino is found in Antenora, and thus was a betrayer of party or country.  In what did his \softline
sin consist?  Dante refers to the 'betrayal' involving the castles in v. 86, but seems to think this was \softline
only an accusation.  However, his real treacherous behavior, in Dante's eyes, may have involved \softline
either his betrayal of his own Ghibelline party, or of the good forces in Pisa itself in his double-dealing with Judge Nino, who also happened to be his grandson.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Almost all admire the horror of this scene, Ugolino lifting his gore-stained mouth from \softline
Ruggieri's neck, then wiping it on the hair of his enemy's head.  We may reflect that Ugolino is \softline
moved to cease his vengeful chewing by his hope for further, greater vengeance: Dante's \softline
recounting of his case against Ruggieri in the world above.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 4-6.}{\plain \fs24   Ugolino's first words are nearly universally observed to be a citation of the opening \softline
of Aeneas's sad speech to Dido in }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  II.3-8, a passage also nearly universally cited for the \softline
beginning of Francesca's second speech to Dante (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.121-123).  Why the repetition?  \softline
Hollander ("A Note on }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXIII, 37-74: Ugolino's Importunity," }{\plain \fs24 \i Speculum}{\plain \fs24  59 [1964]), p. \softline
550, suggests that it represents a sort of test for the reader, who now hears another 'sympathetic \softline
sinner' trying to capture the good will of the protagonist (and, indeed, of the reader) and is \softline
supposed to realize that this refrain has been heard before, similarly put to the service of \softline
exculpating a sinner by that very sinner.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For a second Virgilian resonance here see }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  I.209, where Aeneas hides the grief in \softline
his heart from his companions ('premit altum corde dolorem'); the echo of these words ('che 'l }{\plain \fs24 \i cor}{\plain \fs24  \softline
mi }{\plain \fs24 \i preme}{\plain \fs24 ') was noted by Tommaseo (comm. to these verses) who observes the differing contexts.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 8.}{\plain \fs24   The phrasing of Ugolino's hoped for fruition of infamy for Ruggieri possibly reflects \softline
the language of the parable of the sower (Luke 8:4-11), where Jesus interprets the seed as the \softline
word of God.  In their commentary, Durling and Martinez (New York and Oxford: Oxford \softline
University Press, 1996), p. 531, suggest the importance, for the images of fruition used both by \softline
Ugolino and Alberigo, of Matthew 7:20, 'by their fruits you shall know them.'  Theodore Faunce 
(Princeton '73) many years ago suggested another biblical passage that comments adversely upon \softline
Ugolino's hope: 'For the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness and righteouness and truth' (Ephesians \softline
5:9).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 9.}{\plain \fs24   Both Francesca (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.126) and Ugolino weep and speak simultaneously, each of them \softline
in imitation of Aeneas's imagined hardened soldier, who would have to speak through tears if he \softline
had the fall of Troy to narrate (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . II.6-8).  And both Francesca and Ugolino are accompanied \softline
by a companion who does not speak in Dante's presence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 11-12.}{\plain \fs24   Like Farinata (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . X.25), Ugolino recognizes Dante from his Florentine accent.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 20-21.}{\plain \fs24   The story of Ugolino's imprisonment and death was familiar to all who lived in \softline
Tuscany.  What Dante could not have known, Ugolino says, was how much he had suffered.  The \softline
way in which he says this, on the other hand, indicates the sort of egotism that we will experience \softline
all through his speech.  Here is a man who has experienced death in the company of his children; \softline
we do not even hear of them at first, since his attention is fixed entirely on himself.  See \softline
Hollander, "A Note on }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXIII, 37-74: Ugolino's Importunity," }{\plain \fs24 \i Speculum}{\plain \fs24  59 (1964), p. \softline
551.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 22-24.}{\plain \fs24   The tower (the edifice remains, without its tower, in the Piazza dei Cavallieri in \softline
Pisa to this day) would not serve as prison many years into the fourteenth century, but it \softline
apparently still did so when Dante wrote these lines.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 26-27.}{\plain \fs24   For the supposed greater truth of morning dreams see note to the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  \softline
XXVI.7.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28-36.}{\plain \fs24   Ugolino's dream turns out to have been completely accurate: Ruggieri, out hunting \softline
on Mount San Giuliano, is after Ugolino (the wolf) and his children (the cubs).  He has set, ahead \softline
of the chase, the waiting ambushers, the Ghibelline leaders of Pisa, and with his hounds he is \softline
driving his victims toward them and to their destruction.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For the canine imagery in Cocytus and especially in this canto, see Giorgio Brugnoli, "Le \softline
'cagne conte,'" in }{\plain \fs24 \i Filologia e critica dantesca: studi offerti a Aldo Vallone}{\plain \fs24  (Florence: Olschki, \softline
1989), pp. 95-112.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 37-39.}{\plain \fs24   Ugolino awakes from the dream to find its reality before his eyes, his children \softline
hungry in their sleep and crying for their daily bread, usually brought them in the morning (see vv. \softline
43-44).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 40-42.}{\plain \fs24   Ugolino is angered by the fact that Dante is not weeping.  The protagonist, unlike \softline
most readers, has evidently found a moral vantage point from which there seems something \softline
wrong with this narration.  Since we have seen him weep for other apparently less sympathetic \softline
figures, his lack of compassion might serve as a clue to us about our own reactions.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab In this canto, vv. 5-75, words for weeping and grief (}{\plain \fs24 \i piangere}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i lagrimare}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i doglia}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i dolere}{\plain \fs24 , \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i dolore}{\plain \fs24 , and }{\plain \fs24 \i doloroso}{\plain \fs24 ) occur a total of thirteen times (see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i Allegory in Dante's \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969], p. 306).  And see Vittorio Russo, "Il 
'dolore' del conte Ugolino,"}{\plain \fs24 \i  Sussidi di esegesi dantesca}{\plain \fs24  (Napoli: Liguori, 1966), pp. 147-81, for a \softline
wider study of this phenomenon.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 45.}{\plain \fs24   Apparently the children have had a dream similar to their father's.  The process of the \softline
starvation of Ugolino and his children roughly coincided with the Lenten season.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-48.}{\plain \fs24   Ugolino's dream now has a finer point.  He understands at once that they are to \softline
die, caught by the hunter Ruggieri and his men.  His first impulse, which will be repeated, is to \softline
keep silent.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 49.}{\plain \fs24   Ugolino, who has just criticized Dante for being cruel because he does not weep, now \softline
tells the protagonist that he himself did not weep when he perceived the fate of his sons and of \softline
himself.  Indeed, he turned to stone.  For Hollander ("A Note on }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXIII, 37-74: \softline
Ugolino's Importunity," }{\plain \fs24 \i Speculum}{\plain \fs24  59 [1964]), pp. 552-55, the key passage that stands behind this \softline
scene is found in Luke 11:5-13, Christ's parable of the importunate friend.  A man is visited by a \softline
friend at midnight and goes to the house of another friend to seek bread in order to feed his guest.  \softline
The importuned friend replies, 'Trouble me not, the door is now shut, and my children are with me \softline
in bed; I cannot rise and give you.'  Christ comments on the parable, insisting that importuning \softline
will eventually work: 'If a son shall ask for bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a \softline
stone?'  The various details of the parable, in a form that is both parallel and antithetic to the \softline
action recounted here, find their place in Ugolino's narrative: the knocking on the door echoed in \softline
the hammer blows nailing up the prison, the man in bed with his children behind a locked door, \softline
and the father who will not give his son a stone when he asks for bread.  Ugolino, however, gives \softline
his sons exactly that, a stony silence.  When we ask ourselves what we would do in that situation, \softline
we probably know.  We would speak, not be silent (see Steven Botterill, "Rereading Lancelot: \softline
Dante, Chaucer, and }{\plain \fs24 \i Le Chevalier de la Charrette}{\plain \fs24 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i Philological Quarterly}{\plain \fs24  67 [1988], p. 287); \softline
we would weep with our children, not show Stoic reserve; and, if we were thirteenth-century \softline
Italians, we would pray with them after having sought their forgiveness for having involved them, \softline
innocent, in our political machinations.  The opening passage of Luke 11 has a prayer for us, \softline
should we require one, for it is in that text that Jesus teaches his disciples what we know as 'the \softline
Lord's prayer.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab That Ugolino himself was involved in the pitiless slaying of the son of 'the good Marzucco' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . VI.18) is attested by various early commentators, e.g., Benvenuto, saying that his source \softline
was Giovanni Boccaccio (Benvenuto's comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . VI.16-18), the Anonimo Fiorentino \softline
(comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . VI.16-18), and John of Serravalle (comm to }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . VI.16-18).  Whether the \softline
execution (by decapitation) was carried out under Ugolino's direct orders or not, it occurred in \softline
1287 when Ugolino had returned to Pisa as its co-ruler (with Ruggieri), and necessarily would \softline
have indicated, in Dante's thoughts, Ugolino's complicity.  If Dante wrote this scene with that \softline
belief in mind, it helps to explain his ironic treatment of Ugolino's appeal for pity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-63.}{\plain \fs24   Ugolino, silent, biting his hands from grief, causes the children to think that he is \softline
hungry and they offer themselves to him for food.  They, like their father, can only think literally \softline
about nourishment, forgetting the symbolic eucharistic value of bread.  Freccero (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante: The \softline
Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Rachel Jacoff [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986]), pp. 156-57, believes that their offer }{\plain \fs24 \i is}{\plain \fs24  eucharistic and spiritually motivated.  This is the last conversation 
among them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 64-69.}{\plain \fs24   The father, thinking that display of his own sorrow will only increase the pain felt \softline
by his sons, teaches them his lesson: stoic silence in the face of death.  Had Seneca written this \softline
canto, perhaps we would be justified in thinking Ugolino's reserve a valuable example of courage.  \softline
The silence is only broken once more, on this fourth day, by Gaddo, dying, who asks the question \softline
the reader, too, might very well ask: 'O father, why won't you help me?'  The drama of paternity \softline
that we find in this canto is not that proposed, in his beautiful essay, by Francesco De Sanctis \softline
("L'Ugolino di Dante," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i Opere}{\plain \fs24 , vol. 5 [Turin: Einaudi, 1967 (1869)], pp. 681-704), but that \softline
of a terribly failing father.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The total absence of religious concerns in Dante's portrait of Ugolino is in contrast to the \softline
tale that circulates in some of the commentaries, first in 1333 in the Ottimo (comm. to  XXXIII.1-9), that Ugolino, realizing they were all to die, asked for a friar to confess them, and was refused.  \softline
Had Dante included such a detail, his Ugolino would have seemed a much different man.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 74.}{\plain \fs24   Only now that it is too late does Ugolino break the silence with his cries.  It is the last \softline
heart-breaking detail of his failure as a father.  The tale that he tells to win Dante's sympathy has \softline
also failed, as we shall see.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 75.}{\plain \fs24   Did Ugolino ingest his children?  For a history of the centuries-long debate see \softline
Hollander ("Ugolino's Supposed Cannibalism: A Bibliographical Note and Discussion," }{\plain \fs24 \i Quaderni \softline
d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24  6 [1985], pp. 64-81).  For a strong argument in favor of the notion, see Ronald \softline
Herzman ("Cannibalism and Communion in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  98 [1980], pp. 53-78).  To most, the position represented by Herzman and others, mainly (in recent years) \softline
Americans, seems a not convincing interpretation.  In Singleton's view, it is a 'curious view,' one \softline
'hardly worth a serious rebuttal' (comm. to XXXIII.75).  This writer stands with Geoffrey \softline
Chaucer's view of the matter in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Monk's Tale}{\plain \fs24 , v. 2455: 'Hymself, despeired, eek for hunger \softline
starf' (and he, despairing, also [i.e., as the children had] died from hunger).  One wishes that \softline
Chaucer had used a term for starvation, but that might not have rhymed or scanned.  'Digiuno' \softline
(fasting) is not the same thing as 'hunger.'  And surely Chaucer knew that.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab An observation in the commentary of Guido da Pisa also offers evidence that the number \softline
of days in the narrative (seven) is significant in this regard.  Guido says, 'And lest it seem \softline
impossible that one could have lived six days without food, heed Macrobius on the }{\plain \fs24 \i Dream of \softline
Scipio}{\plain \fs24 .  He says that the life of a man cannot last beyond seven days without food' (comm. to \softline
XXXIII.37-45).  Pietro di Dante thinks of a biblical passage that also involves a seven-day fast.  \softline
David fasted for seven days when his son by Bathsheba was stricken, and then was convinced by \softline
the priests to resume eating, lest he perish, upon the death of the child (II Samuel 12:15-23).  If \softline
Dante, with his so carefully calculated seven days to starvation, is aware of this bit of medical \softline
lore, Ugolino died at the limit of human endurance without nourishment.  Had he ingested the \softline
flesh of his children, he would have lived longer.  Further, when the corpses were exhibited \softline
outside the tower, after their removal, the scandal of the teeth-torn flesh would have made the \softline
rounds.  No such story did, with the exception of a variant, somewhat suspect, in text of the \softline
commentary of Jacopo della Lana.  See Hollander, "Ugolino's Supposed Cannibalism: A \softline
Bibliographical Note and Discussion," }{\plain \fs24 \i Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24  6 (1985), n. 24.  For still another \softline
review of the question and a return to the cannibalistic reading see Fabrizio Franceschini, 
"Un'interpretazione strutturale di }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIII 75 nel primo Ottocento (Giovanni Carmignani, \softline
1826)," }{\plain \fs24 \i Rivista di Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 , 1 (2001), pp. 128-46.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For another possible source of Ugolino's narrative and, in particular, its final verse, see \softline
Andreas Heil ("Ugolino und Andromache: Ein Senecazitat bei Dante?" }{\plain \fs24 \i Deutsches Dante-Jahrbuch}{\plain \fs24  75 [2000], pp. 57-65), arguing for a series of references to elements in the scene \softline
between Andromache and Ulysses, in Seneca's tragedy }{\plain \fs24 \i Troades}{\plain \fs24 , especially Ulysses' speech, lines \softline
578-587, concerning Andromache's grief-filled concern for her (and Hector's) son Astyanax.  Line \softline
581, 'necessitas plus posse quam pietas solet' (necessity tends to have more power than filial love), \softline
surely sounds close to Dante's 'Poscia, pi{\f2 \'6a} che 'l dolor, pot{\f1\u233\'e9} 'l digiuno' (Then fasting had more \softline
power than grief).  Heil is aware of the problem that we have no sure knowledge of Dante's \softline
reading in the tragedies of Seneca.  He admits that he may have known passages from Seneca \softline
from various }{\plain \fs24 \i florilegia}{\plain \fs24 , but also suggests that the closeness to Seneca's words in this scene may \softline
point to a first-hand knowledge of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Troades}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 76-78.}{\plain \fs24   His tale told, Ugolino resumes his bestial rage against the cause of his woes, the \softline
skull of Ruggieri, whose evil plots bested Ugolino's own machinations.  For the view that Ugolino \softline
hides his own culpability behind that of others, see Giorgio Barberi Squarotti, "L'orazione del \softline
conte Ugolino," in }{\plain \fs24 \i L'artificio dell'eternit{\f2 \'42}}{\plain \fs24   (Verona: Fiorini, 1972), pp. 283-332.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 79-90.}{\plain \fs24   Romantic readers, who admire Ugolino, do not often read past verse 75 with close \softline
attention.  Dante's apostrophe of Pisa, 'new Thebes,' blames the city, not for killing Ugolino, \softline
which it had a reason to do (if not perhaps a correct one), but for killing the children.  All of \softline
Dante's sympathy is lodged with the children, none with Ugolino.  And here we are not speaking \softline
of the protagonist (who was firm enough himself against Ugolino's entreaties for pity), but of the \softline
author.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab In }{\plain \fs24 \i De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24  I.viii.2-5 Dante had divided Europeans into three large linguistic \softline
groups, Proven{\f1\u231\'e7}al, French, and Italian, by their respective ways of saying 'yes,' }{\plain \fs24 \i oc}{\plain \fs24 , }{\plain \fs24 \i o{\f2 \'56}l}{\plain \fs24 , and }{\plain \fs24 \i s{\f2 \'58}}{\plain \fs24 .  He \softline
thus, at vv. 79-80, refers to the inhabitants of Italy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Capraia and Gorgona are islands in the Mediterranean that then belonged to Pisa.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 91-93.}{\plain \fs24   The transition to Ptolomea is as abrupt as that to Antenora had been (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXXII.70).  And once again the determining detail is the positioning of the faces of those \softline
punished in the area.  These now have their faces turned upwards (where those in Antenora \softline
looked straight ahead and those in Ca{\f2 \'56}na had their faces tilted downward).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Most commentators believe that Ptolomea, where treachery to guests and friends is \softline
punished, gets its name from Ptolemy, the captain of Jericho who, as recorded in (I Maccabees \softline
16:11-17), invited his father-in-law, Simon Maccabeus, and his two sons to a banquet and then, \softline
once they had drunk, slew them.  (There is dispute about the matter, some proposing Ptolemy \softline
XII, king of Egypt, 51-47 B.C., who murdered Pompey as a favor to Julius Caesar [}{\plain \fs24 \i Phars}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
VIII.536-712].)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 94-99.}{\plain \fs24   Their upturned visages turn the eye-sockets into cups in which the tears of the \softline
sinners become small basins of ice.  Fra Alberigo will three times ask Dante to clear these for him \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIII.112-114, 127-128, 148-150).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 100-105.}{\plain \fs24   Despite his frozen facial skin, Dante feels a wind, and asks Virgil how this can \softline
be, since the sun, creator of wind, is absent from this place.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 106-108.}{\plain \fs24   Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, xomm. to vv. 100-108) suggests that the wind \softline
spirating from Satan, to which Virgil alludes gingerly, not wanting to alarm Dante unduly \softline
(compare his behavior as they approached the giants in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXI.29-33), is a perverse imitation \softline
of the breath of the Holy Spirit referred to in Acts 2:3.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 109-114.}{\plain \fs24   The only speaking presence in Ptolomea (identified as Fra Alberigo in verse \softline
118) believes that Dante and Virgil are sinners destined for Judecca, the 'lowest station' in Inferno.  \softline
In Antenora the souls seemed to be able to tell that Dante was alive; here, perhaps because of \softline
their greater physical discomfort and ice-bound blindness, their sensory capacities seem more \softline
limited than those of the souls above them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 115-117.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's 'agreement' with Alberigo is utterly cynical; he has no intention of \softline
helping this sinner in any way, and says what he says only to get the sinner to disclose himself, \softline
swearing a misleading oath in order to reassure him (of course he is going to the 'bottom of the \softline
ice,' but not as a sinner for his eternal punishment, but as a very privileged visitor).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 118-120.}{\plain \fs24   A member of the Jovial Friars (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIII.103), Alberigo was \softline
was a Guelph from Faenza, and, in 1285, invited two of his relatives, with one of whom he had \softline
had a dispute, to dinner.  When he called out for the fruit course, the pre-arranged signal, hired \softline
assasins rushed into the room and killed his guests.  Now, he says, he is having a fruit course of \softline
his own, in which he is getting more (and worse) than he gave, date for fig (since, in Dante's day, \softline
dates were more expensive than figs).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 122-133.}{\plain \fs24   Here, in answer to the protagonist's question, based in his surpise at finding him \softline
here, since he had not heard that he had died, Alberigo reveals the poet's extraordinary innovation.  \softline
Those who have broken the guest laws die in their souls as soon as they do so, so that their souls \softline
go to hell, leaving their bodies alive on earth.  As early as Pietro di Dante, some commentators \softline
have pointed to a possible source in John 13:27, where it is said that, shortly after Judas betrayed \softline
Jesus at the Last Supper, Satan entered into Judas.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Atropos is the third of the three Fates (Clotho spins the fabric for the skein of our lives, \softline
Lachesis lets it out from her distaff, and Atropos snips it off at our deaths).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 134-147.}{\plain \fs24   To prove his point, Alberigo points out someone he believes Dante might know \softline
taking his 'winter vacation' here in Ptolomea, Branca d'Oria.  He was a Ghibelline nobleman of \softline
Genoa who, with the help of another family member, treacherously murdered his father-in-law, \softline
Michel Zanche (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXII.88), around 1294.  Thus his soul has been down here for six years, \softline
while his body is still eating, drinking, sleeping, and putting on clothes, as Dante insists.  History \softline
contrived to make Dante's fiction all the more amusing.  Branca, who was born ca. 1233, lived \softline
into his nineties, only dying in 1325, thus outliving his condemner, Dante.  Perhaps he had the \softline
great pleasure of reading about his 'wintering' soul as he enjoyed his life in Genoa.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 148-150.}{\plain \fs24   For the third time Alberigo asks Dante to clear the ice from his eyes, and now 
Dante, having what he wanted from him, simply does not do so.  There are those who argue that \softline
the protagonist here behaves more like a sinner than like a Christian, but by now we should be \softline
used to his approved form of righteous indignation.  And there is no reproof for such behavior \softline
from Virgil here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab 1}{\plain \fs24 \b 51-157.}{\plain \fs24   Matching the apostrophe attacking Pisa that ended the first part of the canto \softline
(vv. 79-90), this one of Genoa concludes the visit to Ptolomea, one of the shortest episodes in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}}