{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b INFERNO CANTO 32}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-9.}{\plain \fs24   Dante apologizes for not having under his control a language rough enough to be the \softline
exact counterpart of what he must describe.  For the relationship of the diction of the passage to \softline
that found in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Rime petrose}{\plain \fs24 , see Poletto's commentary (1894) to verses 1-6, perhaps the \softline
first to contain this observation, now become customary.  See also Luigi Blasucci, "L'esperienza \softline
delle }{\plain \fs24 \i Petrose}{\plain \fs24  e il linguaggio della }{\plain \fs24 \i Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 ," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi su Dante e Ariosto}{\plain \fs24  (Milan: \softline
Ricciardi, 1969), pp. 1-35.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The place he needs to describe is the center of the entire universe (at least it is in the \softline
geocentric view).  If he had the right words, he would be able to set forth more adequately what \softline
he indeed fully understands, i.e., his }{\plain \fs24 \i conception}{\plain \fs24  does not come short of the nature of these things \softline
(see v. 12), but his words may.  Dante draws this distinction with some care.  To repeat, his \softline
'conception' is one matter, his description of it another (it is the 'juice' that he must 'squeeze' from \softline
the 'fruit' of his experience).  And the setting of that experience into verse is no light task (}{\plain \fs24 \i impresa}{\plain \fs24  \softline
-- for the importance of this word, referring variously to Dante's journey and to his poem, see \softline
Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), p. \softline
230], citing its other three occurrences in the poem [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . II.41; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . II.47; }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIII.95], not \softline
one for a tongue that is capable only of 'babytalk.'  For the linguistic program concerning \softline
'babytalk' found in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24  and its oppositional relation to that previously advanced by \softline
Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 , see Hollander, "Babytalk in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studies in \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24  (Ravenna: Longo, 1980), pp. 115-29.  Here Dante is including two words, 'mommy' and \softline
'daddy,' that he himself had explicitly proscribed from the illustrious vernacular (}{\plain \fs24 \i De vulgari \softline
eloquentia}{\plain \fs24  II.vii.4).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab A curiosity to be taken under consideration is the claim made by Berthier (comm. to these \softline
verses), citing Ferrazzi's }{\plain \fs24 \i Manuale Dantesco}{\plain \fs24  (IV, p. 235), that it is probable that Dante derived his \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i terza rima}{\plain \fs24  from Rutebeuf's Old French verse.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 10-12.}{\plain \fs24   This is Dante's second invocation.  For the program of invocation in the poem as a \softline
whole, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  II.7-9.  Here the poet seeks aid only from the Muses and only for \softline
his ability to find the right words for his difficult task in rendering such unpleasant matter.  His \softline
'conception' (see v. 4), we may understand, is already formed (in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . II.7 he implicitly asked for \softline
that, as well).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The reference to the poet Amphion probably derives from the }{\plain \fs24 \i Ars poetica}{\plain \fs24  of Horace (vv. \softline
394-396), a work well known to Dante.  Amphion was able, through the magic of his inspired \softline
lyre-playing, to compel the rocks of Mt. Cithaeron to move down the mountain and, of their own \softline
accord, create the walls of Thebes.  Dante, describing the Infernal 'city of destruction,' the ninth \softline
Circle, home of Lucifer, asks for the help of the Muses in order to build, not the physical city, but \softline
his image of it in words that do justice to the conception he has been given.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 13-15.}{\plain \fs24   The poet's address to all the denizens of Cocytus seems to have been aimed \softline
particularly at the arch sinner punished here, Judas, by its reference, first noted by Pietro di Dante \softline
(Pietro1, comm. to these vv.), to Matthew 26:24, Christ's words to Judas, for whom it had been \softline
better 'not to have been born.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 16-18.}{\plain \fs24   The narrative of this ultimate part of the first }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24  has been held in abeyance for 
nine self-conscious opening lines about the poet's craft, for an invocation, and then for an \softline
apostrophe.  The visit to the pit of the universe has finally begun.  However, Dante's failure to \softline
manage these details more clearly has rattled his readers.  Do the giants stand on the icy floor of \softline
Cocytus?  Apparently not.  Here Dante asserts that he and Virgil find themselves far below the \softline
feet of Antaeus.  They do not seem, however, to have themselves descended that distance.  \softline
Rather, it seems more likely that Antaeus has set them down just about where they find \softline
themselves now.  Some commentators object, since most humans, and certainly most giants, are \softline
probably not limber enough (or long-armed enough) to bend at the waist and deposit a burden \softline
well below the level of their feet.  Do we learn where the giants stand?  No.  Is Dante concerned \softline
lest their feet become chilled on the ice?  No.  Might they be standing on some sort of ledge?  \softline
Yes.  Can we be certain that they are?  No.  Might Antaeus have longer arms than we like to \softline
think?  Yes.  Can we know that he does?  No.  This is a poem, and, especially when it deals with \softline
the marvelous, while it is at times amazingly precise, it is also, at other times, exasperatingly (to \softline
certain readers) imprecise.  As a result, beginning perhaps with Bianchi (comm. to verse 17), \softline
commentators have invented a ledge for Antaeus, and hence all the giants, to stand on.  It has \softline
become part of the furniture of the poem, even if Dante did not construct it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-21.}{\plain \fs24   The identity of this voice has long puzzled readers.  Torraca (comm. to v. 19), \softline
essentially alone in this opinion, opts for Virgil; many for an unnamed sinner; many others for one \softline
(or both) of the Alberti brothers, whom we see in vv. 41-51.  Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to vv.  \softline
16-21), followed only by his student John of Serravalle, makes probably the best surmise: the \softline
voice is that of Camicione de' Pazzi, a position that seems sensible, as we shall see as we move \softline
through the scene, but has had no success among the commentators.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 22-24.}{\plain \fs24   Dante had been looking back up in the direction of Antaeus and wondering at the \softline
height of the wall he now stood beneath.  The voice calls on him to attend to his surroundings, as \softline
he now immediately does, realizing that he is standing on a frozen lake.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 25-30.}{\plain \fs24   A double simile describes the thickness of the ice, greater than even that found on \softline
the Danube or the Don, so thick that even had a mountain (whether Tambura or Pania, in the \softline
Apuan Alps above Lucca) fallen upon it, it would not have even creaked.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 31-36.}{\plain \fs24   A second simile reflects the protagonist's new awareness that there are sinners in \softline
this ice, looking like frogs in summer (and how they must wish for summer, these shades), with \softline
just their snouts out of the water, and their teeth sounding like the clicking bills of storks.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 37-39.}{\plain \fs24   This first group of sinners (we will learn eventually that there are four, each in a \softline
somewhat different posture) has their heads facing downwards.  Their mouths clatter with the \softline
cold, their eyes run with tears (as we shall find out, that is a better condition than that enjoyed by \softline
those lower down in the ninth Circle).  We are in Ca{\f2 \'56}na, named for Cain, the first murderer (of his \softline
brother Abel).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 40-45.}{\plain \fs24   Now Dante looks just before him and sees two who are bound together tightly; he \softline
asks for their identities.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-51.}{\plain \fs24   These two (we will shortly learn that they are brothers) lift up their heads to \softline
behold Dante, which action causes their tears to spill over their faces and onto their lips (instead \softline
of onto the ice), thus gluing them together still more firmly when their tears become gelid.  Frozen \softline
into a parody of the Christian kiss of peace, they respond by moving the only part of them they \softline
can, their foreheads, which they use to butt one another in anger.  Once we hear who they are, we \softline
will understand the reason for such hatred.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 54-69.}{\plain \fs24   The speaker is Camicione de' Pazzi.  Nothing much is known of him except that \softline
he, from near Florence (the Val d'Arno) murdered his relative Ubertino.  His is the only voice we \softline
hear in this first zone of Cocytus, the prime reason to believe that it was he who spoke at vv. 19-21.  Having warned Dante to be careful as he began walking, lest he kick the inseparate heads of \softline
the two brothers, he now identifies them for Dante.  Alessandro and Napoleone degli Alberti, \softline
Counts of Mangona, were also 'neighbors' of Dante's, living in the countryside near Prato.  While \softline
little is known of them, they apparently killed one another in the 1280s as the result of a dispute \softline
over their inheritance from their father.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Also here, says Camicione, is Mordred (vv.61-62), who killed King Arthur and was slain \softline
by him, as recounted in the Old French }{\plain \fs24 \i Morte d'Arthur}{\plain \fs24 .  The blow of Arthur's lance left a hole \softline
clear through Mordred's body so that a ray of sunlight passed through it -- and thus through his \softline
shadow as well.  And Focaccia is here (v. 63).  That was the nickname (see John Ahern, \softline
"Apocalyptic Onomastics: Focaccia [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXII, 63]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Romance Notes}{\plain \fs24  23 [1982], pp. 181-84) of Vanni dei Cancellieri of Pistoia, a White Guelph who was reputed to have murdered \softline
various of his relatives by various commentators, most probably at least his cousin Detto, a \softline
member of the Black Guelphs, ca. 1286.  Also present is Sassol Mascheroni (vv. 63-66), another \softline
Florentine who murdered a relative in a quarrel over an inheritance.  After he identifies himself, \softline
Camicione says that his relative, Carlino, will commit a still greater sin, betraying a White \softline
stronghold in the Val d'Arno to Black forces for money -- a sin fit for the next zone, Antenora, \softline
where political treachery is punished, thus making (in his own eyes, at least) Camicione's sin seem \softline
less offensive.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Carlino's treachery and death took place only in 1302; therefore, Camicione is using the \softline
power of the damned to see into the future, of which we were told in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  X.100-108.  The \softline
staging of a future damnation just here perhaps has consequence for Francesca's projected \softline
damnation of her husband in 1304 to precisely this circle and zone: Gianciotto is headed here, \softline
according to her (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.107; and see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.107).  Since Dante uses this occasion \softline
precisely to predict the later coming of a damned soul currently still alive, we may be reminded of \softline
Francesca's similar prediction.  And we sense how easy it would have been for Dante to have had \softline
Camicione, guilty of the same sin as Gianciotto, tell of his future presence in Ca{\f2 \'56}na, thus \softline
'guaranteeing' Francesca's prediction.  And he, like Francesca in this, tries to exculpate himself to \softline
some degree by insisting that the person he refers to is more guilty than he is, and will be punished \softline
still lower down in hell.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 70-72.}{\plain \fs24   We have crossed a border without knowing it.  The ice of Cocytus is not marked, \softline
as were the Malebolge, with clear delineators that separate one sin from another.  This difference \softline
may result from Dante's sense of the essential commonality of all the sins that are treacherous in \softline
nature, that are so utterly debased (they are referred to as 'matta bestialitade' in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XI.82-83).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The four areas of Cocytus make concentric circles, each lower in the ice than the last, as 
we move toward the center.  We understand that we have reached a new zone only because the \softline
faces of the damned look straight out at us (and are not bent down, as they were in Ca{\f2 \'56}na).  This \softline
zone is named after Antenor, the Trojan who, a grandson of Priam, in the non-Virgilian versions \softline
of the story of the Trojan War, urged that Helen be given back to Menelaus.  After Paris refused \softline
to give her back, Antenor, in such sources as Dictys Cretensis, is responsible for betraying the city \softline
to the Greeks.  He escaped from the city and founded Padua (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . V.75).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The rare (unique?) picture we get here of Dante, having finished his work on the }{\plain \fs24 \i Comedy}{\plain \fs24  \softline
for the day, walking a winter countryside, a 'civilian' again, is disconcerting and moving, especially \softline
when we consider that he never had those days of 'being done,' perhaps only barely finishing \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24  before his death in September 1321.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 73-78.}{\plain \fs24   The protagonist's footwork has raised questions in many.  Did he kick Bocca on \softline
purpose?  The language is such that answering is not easy.  Was the blow the result of will (his \softline
own) or fate (destiny, as determined by God) or chance (mere accident, a thing of no consequence \softline
to the Divine Mind)?  These three alternatives offer a range of genuine and separate possibilities, \softline
which is not true for all the hypotheses that one may consult in the commentary tradition.  As \softline
Bosco/Reggio argue, that Dante kicks the head }{\plain \fs24 \i hard}{\plain \fs24  makes it difficult to believe that his will was \softline
not involved (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXXII.76-112).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 79-81.}{\plain \fs24   The victim of Dante's kick, we will learn at v. 106, is Bocca degli Abati.  Bocca's \softline
betrayal occurred on the battlefield at Montaperti (1260) when he, a member of the Florentine \softline
Guelph army, cut off the arm of the standard-bearer at the height of the battle.  The ensuing \softline
disastrous defeat of the Guelphs at the hands of the Ghibellines was sometimes laid at his door, as \softline
it is here by Dante.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 82-85.}{\plain \fs24   The protagonist thinks he knows that this might well be Bocca, and gets Virgil's \softline
permission to question him.  We recall how stern Virgil was in his rebuke of Dante for listening to \softline
the 'tenzone' between Master Adam and Sinon in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXX.131-132.  Here he stands \softline
complacently to one side as Dante gets involved in a fairly violent 'tenzone' himself.  But now, one \softline
might argue, he is actively engaged in remonstrating with a wrong-doer and thus has Virgil's full \softline
support.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 87-112.}{\plain \fs24   This 'tenzone' is in five parts.  (1) Dante begins it with a rebuke for Bocca's bad \softline
manners (a sinner in the depth of hell should treat mortal special visitors better than he has done); \softline
Bocca answers with continuing complaint.  (2) Dante offers fame -- for a price; Bocca answers \softline
rudely.  (3) Dante moves to a threat of physical assault; Bocca defies him.  (4) Dante begins \softline
pulling out Bocca's hair; Bocca 'barks,' thus moving another sinner there present to name him (he \softline
is answering in Bocca's place, as it were).  (5) Dante rejoices in his victory over Bocca; Bocca \softline
remains sullen.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The Italian at v. 90 is, in itself, ambivalent.  Because of the conjugation of the present \softline
subjunctive, 'se fossi vivo' can either mean 'were I alive' or 'were you alive.'  Since Bocca, like \softline
Camicione (if he is the speaker of vv. 19-21), seems to be able to tell that Dante is in the flesh, \softline
e.g., from the sound of his footfall on the ice, from the force of his kick, it would make no sense \softline
for him to doubt Dante's presence as a living being.  Further, Dante's response would seem to \softline
follow better if Bocca's words are understood as meaning, 'were I alive.'  Our translation runs 
accordingly.  (There are those who dispute this reading.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab At vv. 103-105 Dante is playfully citing his own vengeful and sexually-charged desire to \softline
pull the hair of the 'stony lady' in one of his }{\plain \fs24 \i Rime petrose}{\plain \fs24 , 'Cos{\f2 \'58} nel mio parlar' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Rime}{\plain \fs24  CIII.66-73).  \softline
For the most recent discussion see Emilio Pasquini ("Lettura di }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXII," }{\plain \fs24 \i L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24  13 \softline
[1999]), pp. 31-33, noting as well various other resonances of the 'stony rhymes' in this canto.  \softline
See also the study of Durling and Martinez (}{\plain \fs24 \i Time and the Crystal: Studies in Dante's "Rime \softline
petrose"}{\plain \fs24  [Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990]) for a wider view.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 113-123.}{\plain \fs24   Bocca's revenge for his 'betrayal' by Buoso da Duera is to reveal the names of \softline
others in Antenora so that they may join him in infamy as a result of Dante's eventual report to the \softline
living, the first of these, naturally, being Buoso himself (vv. 114-117).  Buoso was a Ghibelline \softline
(he is 'paired' with the Guelph Bocca) who, entrusted by Manfred's high command to hold the \softline
high passes near Parma against the invading army of Charles of Anjou in 1265, apparently \softline
accepted a bribe in order to let the Guelph forces reach Parma without a fight.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Tesauro de' Beccheria (vv. 119-120), abbot of Vallombrosa, a Ghibelline, was accused of \softline
treacherously assisting the Florentine Ghibellines, banned from the city in 1258, to re-enter \softline
Florence.  He was beheaded for betraying the city.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Gianni de' Soldanieri (v. 121), also a Ghibelline, joined the popular uprising against the \softline
Ghibelline leaders of Florence just after the defeat and death of the great Ghibelline leader, \softline
Manfred, at Benevento in 1266.  He thus was seen as betraying his own party.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Ganelon (v. 122) treacherously betrayed Charlemagne's rear guard at Roncesvalles in 778.  \softline
See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXI.16-18.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Tebaldello Zambrasi of Faenza (v. 122), also a Ghibelline, betrayed his fellow Ghibellines \softline
of Bologna who, having been exiled, had taken refuge in Faenza.  In 1280 Tebaldello opened a \softline
gate of his city, just before dawn, to a war party of Bolognese Guelphs so that they might avenge \softline
themselves upon their fellow citizens.  Tebaldello himself died in 1282 in another battle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 124-125.}{\plain \fs24   A sudden change in the protagonist's attention reveals the pair of sinners whom \softline
we will shortly know as Uglolino and Ruggieri (vv. 13-14 of the next canto), the one with his \softline
head above the other's.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 127-132.}{\plain \fs24   Again Dante blends an unadorned 'ordinary' scene (a hungry man wolfing down \softline
a load of bread) with classical material (a passage from Statius, }{\plain \fs24 \i Theb}{\plain \fs24 . VIII.751-762) in a double \softline
simile.  The moment in Statius describes Tydeus, dying in battle, asking his men to cut off for him \softline
the head of Melanippus, whom he had just slain, but who had first given him his own mortal blow.  \softline
They do so (Capaneus [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XIV] is the one who carries the body to him).  With savage joy \softline
Tydeus, dying, chews upon the head of the man who had killed him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 133.}{\plain \fs24   For the 'bestial sign' as reflecting the words of St. Paul, see Freccero's essay, 'Bestial \softline
Sign and Bread of Angels' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Rachel Jacoff [Cambridge: \softline
Harvard University Press, 1986]), p. 160: 'But if you bite one another, take heed or you will be \softline
consumed by one another' (Galatians 5:15).  The cannibalistic scene before us here introduces the \softline
concerns with starvation that will be so prominent in the first half of the next canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 135-139.}{\plain \fs24   Dante offers to present to the world this sinner's case (so that it may judge 
whether or not his wrath is justified) if he will but reveal his name and the offense committed by \softline
the other sinner.  Dante fulfills this promise in the following canto, and the world -- or at least the \softline
Dantean part of it -- has been arguing about that case ever since.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab There is also a dispute over the exact meaning of the last line of Dante's oath.  A number \softline
of understandings have been offered: 'as long as I do not die first' (the choice of many of the early \softline
commentators); 'as long as my tongue does not fail me' (also popular among the early \softline
commentators); 'if this cold [of Cocytus] does not wither it' (only Torraca and Pietrobono; \softline
probably not worth serious consideration); 'if my words do not die' (Grabher and Fallani); 'if it \softline
does not become paralyzed' (Steiner and quite a few modern commentators).  It seems clear that \softline
Dante, in this vernacular and salty oath, swears on his life that he will carry out his promise.  \softline
Tozer, in 1901 (comm. to vv. 138-139), paraphrases adequately: 'If I live to recount it.'  Recently \softline
Guglielmo Gorni has tried an entirely new tack: 'if my Florentine vernacular survives' ("'Se quella \softline
con ch'io parlo non si secca' [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXXII 139]," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Operosa parva per Gianni Antonini}{\plain \fs24 , ed D. \softline
De Robertis & F. Gavazzeni [Verona: Valdonega, 1996], pp. 41-46), but this seems more \softline
venturesome than necessary.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab When we finish reading this canto we may reflect on the singular fact that, for the first \softline
time since he entered the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.67), Virgil has not spoken in an entire canto.  See the note \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXX.37-41.\par
}}