This file contains Campbell's list of tasks that we need to do in
order to complete a reload of the database. This document was
written Aug 30, 1998, and updated later as needed.

I'm assuming the following strategy for this reload: The primary
purpose of the reload is to correct errors in the 1991 load and to
add some new commentaries. Making changes in the database to support
a better user interface is a desirable but secondary goal, meaning
that we will make these changes along the way if possible, but we
will not allow them to delay the reload.

1. Assemble "best available" text of all comms into Commentaries.ng
(aka C.ng). This means copying into C.ng all of the '91 comms text
as modified by any subsequent editing and copying into C.ng all
comms acquired after the '91 load. This will require a lot of
careful comparisons against the actual running database to be sure
we have the right text in C.ng and are not introducing new errors.

This step will tell us if we have lost the text of any comms. If we
have, we will need to dump them from the running '91 database.

2. Modify the C.ng text by fixing all the errors documented in the
email messages, notes, typo files, and TODO files. This will
probably be the most time-consuming part of the process.

3. Make technical preparations for reloading:
   a. Determine location of new database.
   b. Create BRS files for new database.
   c. Review preload and load scripts. Update and test as needed.

4. Do a trial load of poem and several comms. See if the current
user interface works with it.

5. Fix problems found in 4 and repeat until done.

A secondary issue which I would like to settle is how to represent
non-English characters in the texts. As we have already noted, the
problem is representing the characters while still making the text
searchable. Before we get to step 4, I will propose some options for
this problem.
