{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 09}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Like }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX, this ninth canto is both liminal, marking the boundary between two \softline
large areas, and filled with classical reference.  And it is the first entire canto devoted to the \softline
transition from one poetic zone to another since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXI.  This sort of self-conscious poetic \softline
behavior puts us on notice, from the very outset, that we need to pay particular attention here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Its reference to Aurora, surprisingly enough, has made this passage among the most hotly \softline
debated of the poem.  In the 'orthodox' version of the classical myth, Aurora, goddess of the \softline
dawn, arose from her couch, where she slept with her aged husband, Tithonus, to rise in the sky \softline
on her chariot, announcing the coming of day.  A brief and incomplete summary of the debate \softline
yields the following (for a summary of the essential arguments over the passage and an attempt to \softline
restore Benvenuto da Imola's central and daring reading of it see Hollander ["'La concubina di \softline
Titone antico': }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.1," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Electronic Bulletin of the Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (July \softline
2001)]: Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Third Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 \softline
(1903)]), pp. 74-85, essentially solved this problem almost a century ago, but in fact the early \softline
commentators (to whom Moore pays little attention) had already done so.  (Paul Spillenger \softline
["Canto IX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy": Introductory Readings II: "Purgatorio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Tibor \softline
Wlassics (Charlottesville: Lectura Dantis, University of Virginia, 1993), pp. 128-41], who devotes \softline
all but two pages of his 'lectura' of this canto to the opening tercet, is a rare discussant to revisit \softline
the glosses of Jacopo della Lana and Benvenuto, only then to deny their applicability.)  Nearly all \softline
of them are quite sure that Dante has invented a second myth, one in which Tithonus is married to \softline
Aurora 1 (of the sun) but has a 'relationship' with Aurora 2 (of the moon).  The poetic facts are \softline
simple, according to Moore.  The time is between 8:30 and 9pm, the cold animal is the \softline
constellation Scorpio (and certainly not that belated other candidate, Pisces, arguments for which \softline
identification Moore competently dismantles), and thus the aurora we deal with is that of the \softline
moon.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a review of these tormented verses and their tormentors (up to 1975) see Steno \softline
Vazzana ({\u8220\'93}Il Canto IX del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio: letture degli anni 1976-{\u8216\'91}79}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Silvio \softline
Zennaro, Casa di Dante in Roma [Roma: Bonacci, 1981]), pp. 180-85.  And for one of the most \softline
interesting discussions of their meaning see Ezio Raimondi ("Semantica del canto IX del \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Metafora e storia: Studi su Dante e Petrarca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: Einaudi, 1970 (1968)]), \softline
pp. 95-98.  See also Gino Casagrande ("Il 'freddo animale' e la 'concubina' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX, 1-6]," \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Filologia e critica dantesca: Studi offerti a Aldo Vallone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1989], pp. 141-59) and Alison Cornish (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Reading Dante's Stars}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000], pp. \softline
68-77).  A late 14th-c. Italian MS of Virgil, written by Astolfino Marinoni at Pavia in 1393-94, \softline
states that Dante had cited }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.585 here: 'And now early Dawn, leaving her saffron bed of \softline
Tithonus....'   For this and other citations of Dante in early Renaissance commentaries to the Latin \softline
classics see Gian Carlo Alessio ("La }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comed{\f3 \'58}a}{\plain \fs24 \f1  nel margine dei classici," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi di filologia \softline
medievale offerti a D'Arco Silvio Avalle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: Ricciardi, 1996], pp. 3-25).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Much has been made of the phrase 'where we were' by the 'solar aurorans' in the \softline
hopes of counterposing the northern hemisphere (site of the solar Aurora at this hour in Italy) and \softline
the southern (where Dante and his companions are becoming sleepy).  However, Dante is \softline
probably not contrasting the two hemispheres but the glow in the night sky of purgatory that \softline
spreads above them and the darkness of their surroundings as night advances.  For a similar 
situation, consider }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.8, the phrase 'l{\f3 \'42} dov' i' era' (there where I was) by which Dante \softline
refers to his situation in the southern hemisphere looking at the stars from there.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab His figure of speech involves mixing metaphors, as the night is given feet, by which she \softline
measures her hours, and wings that do the same thing.  The meaning is that the time is between \softline
8:30 and 9:00 pm.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In a gesture of some charm but little possible historical foundation Benvenuto (comm. to \softline
vv. 7-12) reads the passage as revelatory of Dante's studious burning, not only of the midnight oil, \softline
but even that of the pre-dawn hours: 'vir studiosus erat solitus vigilare per tres horas noctis et \softline
evigilare in aurora sicut nunc fecit.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-11.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's Adamic sleepiness, that is, the heaviness brought on by his physical being, \softline
is adumbrated by a later passage (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.43-44), in which Virgil comments upon the difficulties \softline
experienced by this living soul as he climbs the mountain in his flesh ('la carne d'Adamo').  But the \softline
theme is introduced in the first canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.10-12) where Dante's 'sleepiness' is \softline
associated with Adam's, according to Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: \softline
Princeton University Press, 1969]), p. 81n., resuscitating Filippo Villani's gloss on this passage (as \softline
well as many another in his commentary), which suggests a figural relationship between the fallen \softline
Adam, sent forth into his exile from the garden, and the sinful Dante.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reader has possibly not remembered that Dante and Virgil are still in company: \softline
Sordello, Nino Visconti, and Currado Malaspina have not yet been left behind; thus the group still \softline
numbers five.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's dream, occurring some nine hours after he fell asleep, takes place in the \softline
pre-dawn moments in which the swallow sings sadly }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 perhaps}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (if we credit the mythographers, \softline
most certainly Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.412-674) in memory of the rape of Philomel by her sister \softline
Procne's husband Tereus and her subsequent metamorphosis into a swallow (in Dante's version, \softline
where most others prefer the nightingale -- see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.19-20, a passage that \softline
makes the swallow here necessarily Philomel).  Tereus, like Tithonus, has had sexual concourse \softline
with each of two sisters -- if we accept the notion that the opening passage of the poem posits a \softline
lunar aurora (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.1-9).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the many (and mainly Ovidian) myths referred to in this canto see Picone ("Canto IX," \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone \softline
[Florence: Cesati, 2001 (1999)]), pp. 121-22.  For a related topic, Dante's debt to Ovid and his \softline
Ovidian tactics in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Leonard Barkan ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Taccia Ovidio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Metamorphosis, Poetics, and \softline
Meaning in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Gods Made Flesh: Metamorphosis and the Pursuit of \softline
Paganism}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986], pp. 137-70, 317-27).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante's insistence on identifying Procne with the nightingale and not Philomel seems \softline
surprising to a modern reader, who has learned the tale the way that he or she believes it is found \softline
in Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.424-676).  However, consideration of Ovid's verses when he indicates the \softline
avian identities of the two metamorphosed sisters yields results that are less than clear (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VI.668-669): 'petit altera silvas, / altera tecta subit' (one heads for the woods, the other for the \softline
eaves).  Most of us are certain that the woody one is the nightingale, alias Philomela, and that the \softline
one who lives amidst our houses is the swallow, alias Procne.  Dante, along with some ancient \softline
writers, preferred to have Procne as the nightingale -- and Ovid's text hardly removes this 
possibility.  A later text in the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.19) makes it clear that Dante refers here to \softline
Philomel as the swallow, since there Procne is clearly referred to as the nightingale.  The \softline
commentary tradition is interesting, in that almost every commentator before Lombardi (1791) \softline
simply assumed that the swallow in this passage referred to Procne.  Lombardi (comm. to verse  \softline
15), paying attention to the passage in the seventeenth canto, is the first to see the nature of the \softline
problem: Dante's adhesion to the aberrant classical and post-classical tradition that reverses the \softline
more usual labels.  Bosco and Reggio (comm. to this passage) argue that, in addition to the \softline
possible confusions derivable from Ovid's passage, texts in Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ecl}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.79; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.15; \softline
IV.511-515) also might have made a clear understanding on Dante's part problematic.  Still \softline
valuable is Moore's brief discussion of the problem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Scripture and \softline
Classical Authors in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 (1896)]), pp. 209-10; and see Georg \softline
Rabuse ("Schwalbe und Nachtigall," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Deutsches Dante-Jahrbuch}{\plain \fs24 \f1  38 [1960], pp. 168-92).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The greater truth, indeed the prophetic power, of dreams that came near morning \softline
was something of a commonplace in Dante's time.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.7.  Beginning \softline
with Torraca (comm. to this passage) twentieth-century commentators have reminded readers that \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.vii.13) Dante had adduced our awareness of our own immortality from the fact \softline
that our dreams foretold the future for us. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The formulaic expression (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mi parea}{\plain \fs24 \f1  + }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vedere}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) is an earmark of Dante's description of \softline
seeing in dream (see also }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.36; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.85-87; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.97-98).  For the \softline
consistency in Dante's oneiric vocabulary, dating back to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita \softline
Nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Dante's Perceptions of Beatrice,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  92 [1974]), pp. 3-4.  For studies in \softline
English of the three purgatorial dreams see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), pp. 136-58; Cervigni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poetry of Dreams}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Florence: Olschki, 1986], pp. 95-180);  Baranski ("Dante's Three Reflective Dreams," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaderni \softline
d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 [1989], pp. 213-36).  See also Stefanini ("I tre sogni del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Struttura e \softline
allegoria," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in the Italian Renaissance: Essays in Memory of Arnolfo B. Ferruolo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. \softline
G. P. Biasin, A. N. Mancini, and N. J. Perella [Naples: Societ{\f3 \'42} Editrice Napoletana, 1985], pp. \softline
43-66).  For a recent Italian discussion of the oneiric elements of this canto see Calenda \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , IX: le forme del sogno, i miti, il rito," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rivista di Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1 [2001], pp. 284-301).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 20-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reality corresponding to the eagle outside the dream is, naturally, Saint Lucy \softline
(identified by Virgil in verse 55), who is bearing Dante higher up the mountain while he sleeps in \softline
her arms.  But does this eagle have a symbolic valence?  Some early commentators (the Ottimo \softline
the earliest) read the text strictly literally: the eagle is the bird of Jove (or, perhaps, Jove in the \softline
shape of an eagle).  However, beginning with Pietro di Dante the eagle is allegorized as divine \softline
grace, and then, by various commentators up to and including Giacalone (comm. to vv. 19-21), as \softline
one form of grace or another (e.g., prevenient, illuminating, etc.).  In the twentieth century there \softline
was a vogue for a quite different allegorical reading, the eagle as symbol of empire.  (To be sure, \softline
this is often, even usually, true in this highly political poem; in this context, however, it seems a \softline
forced reading.)  It would seem most likely that a literal reading is the best procedure here, \softline
following the Ottimo (comm. to vv. 19-24), and simply noting that this eagle is the one who flew \softline
off with Ganymede, as the context allows and encourages, i.e., Dante dreams that he was carried 
off by Jove.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   John of Serravalle (comm. to vv. 19-33), following Benvenuto, allegorizes the \softline
eagle as divine grace and then equates Dante and Ganymede, thus making Dante 'one who lived \softline
with the gods.'  Casini/Barbi (comm. to verse 24) suggest that Dante had in mind Virgil's phrase in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.24-25, 'deorum / concilia' (company of the gods) when he wrote 'al sommo consistoro'; \softline
whether he did or not, his meaning seems clear.  Within the dream there is a certain aura of \softline
violence and fear (implicit reference to the forcible rape of Ganymede by Jove as eagle -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
V.252-257) masking the happier nature of the event: Dante being carried aloft gently by Lucy, \softline
and indeed, in a still happier understanding, on the way to the Empyrean, where he will, for a \softline
while, share the company of the immortal blessed.  In Virgil's ekphrastic moment (this scene \softline
appears woven on a cloak as a prize in the funeral games in honor of Anchises) the youthful \softline
prince (son of Tros, king of Troy) was hunting on Mount Ida on the Troad (not to be confused \softline
with the mountain of the same name on Crete referred to in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.98) and was snatched away \softline
from his companions while his dogs barked after him; Dante's version has a more heavenly \softline
perspective, and we see the scene from Dante/Ganymede's eyes, as though he were rising in a \softline
balloon and watching the shapes of Sordello, Nino, and Currado fall back beneath him (the later \softline
poet has had to omit those wonderful Virgilian dogs).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist's thought within his dream is striking.  Since, within the dream, \softline
Dante is 'thinking like Ganymede,' his thought refers to a place elevated from the normal, e.g., on \softline
this mountain near Troy.  (Some commentators want to keep the usual imperial valence of the \softline
eagle by associating this Mount Ida with Troy and thus empire; however, the point would rather \softline
seem to be that the place is elevated, not that it is Trojan.)  And thus Dante would be thinking that \softline
only such extraordinary, i.e., 'higher,'  mortals like Ganymede and Dante Alighieri are chosen by \softline
the gods for their delight.  And this thought, perfectly in accord with what we will find out on the \softline
first terrace of purgatory proper, associates Dante with the sin of Pride.  Once again, however, the \softline
'reality' tells a different story: the true God is not interested in Dante's curly locks, but in his \softline
Christian soul; and He will pluck Dante up from the mount of purgatory for reasons better than \softline
those that motivated Jove.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The issue of Jove's homosexual desire for Ganymede is mainly avoided in the \softline
commentaries.  It is, nonetheless, noteworthy that, of the many myths available to Dante that \softline
might have expressed the love of the gods for a particular mortal, he has chosen this one.  For the \softline
question of Dante's attitudes toward homosexuality see Hollander ({\u8220\'93}Dante{\u8217\'92}s Harmonious \softline
Homosexuals [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  16.7-90],{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Electronic Bulletin of the Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [June \softline
1996]).  Durling (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The "Divine Comedy" of Dante Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Notes by R. M. Durling and Ronald \softline
Martinez [New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996]), pp. 559-60, on the basis of no \softline
known evidence, is of the opinion that Dante was of homosexual predisposition but had never \softline
acted on his desires.  While that is probably more than can be shown to be true, the question of \softline
Dante's rather 'unmedieval' view of homosexuality (see discussion in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.13-21) \softline
has generally not been dealt with as openly as it ought to be.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The eagle's descent may have still another Virgilian provenance: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.247-250, as Tommaseo (comm. to these verses) was perhaps the first to suggest; he has been followed \softline
by a number of others.  In that scene an eagle, described as 'Jove's golden bird,' offers an omen 
(arranged by Turnus's sister, the nymph Juturna) when it dives from the sky to snatch a swan out \softline
of the water and carries it off as its prey.  (This much of the drama bodes ill for the Trojans, but \softline
they are heartened, unfortunately for them, in the final result, when the rest of the water fowl \softline
attack the eagle and it drops the swan.)  The language is pertinent: Jove's golden bird is attacking \softline
the 'litoreas... avis turbamque sonantem / agminis aligeri' (the fowl along the shore, the clamorous \softline
crowd in their wing{\f3 \'50}d band).  From among this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 agmen aliger}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the eagle picks one.  For the pun \softline
available to Dante on his family name (Alighieri/}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 aliger}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.1-3.  It \softline
seems possible that here Dante is conflating the two Virgilian passages in which a Jovian eagle \softline
seizes its prey and enjoying the coincidence that, in the last of them, that prey is associated with \softline
his own name, since he, too, while dreaming, is being lifted skyward in the talons of Jove.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The fire alluded to here is the ring of fire that was believed to surround the closer-to-earth \softline
sphere of air, just before one might reach the moon.  That this is the 'tanto... del cielo acceso' (so \softline
much of the sky set afire) of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.79 was possibly first suggested by Lombardi (comm. to  \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.79-81).  Thereafter it became a commonplace in the commentaries.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again the negative version of events put forth in the dream has a better \softline
meaning.  It seemed that the eagle and Dante were consumed in the ring of fire high above the \softline
earth, while actually Dante and Lucia have risen to the gate of purgatory, as we shall shortly find \softline
out, and Dante is being awakened, not by the pain of death, but by the late-morning sun on his \softline
eyelids (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.44).  If there is a further significance to this detail, it would seem to refer to \softline
Dante's eventual arrival at the true 'sphere of fire,' the Empyrean.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet describes the narrator's awakening in terms that recall Statius's text \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Achilleid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.247-250), describing the stratagem employed by Thetis, Achilles' mother, in order to \softline
keep him from being 'drafted' into the Trojan war.  Taking him from the care of his tutor, the \softline
centaur Chiron (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.71), Thetis carries him in her arms, sleeping, to the island of Scyros.  \softline
Again Dante adverts to a mythic narrative that has a tragic result; Thetis's benevolent caution will \softline
not prevent the coming of Ulysses and Diomedes to Scyros and the eventual death of Achilles in \softline
the war.  Dante's 'comic' reality counters the Statian tragedy: Achilles is carried down from his \softline
mountain homeland to an island from which he will go off to his death; Dante is carried up a \softline
mountain situated on an island toward his eventual homeland and eternal life.  Rarely in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is the contrast between classical and Christian views, between tragedy and comedy, \softline
more present than in these classicizing passages that open this canto.  It is also true that the \softline
protagonist, as he experiences these new things, behaves very much as the 'old' man that he still is, \softline
and assumes that terror is a valid response to these miraculous events that, the reader can see, \softline
speak only of God's love and protection for even such a sinner as Dante.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante and Virgil have left their companions behind, down the mountain's slope, \softline
and are facing the east, the sun in their faces as the morning advances.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As though to remind the reader that all the material relating to Dante's dream did \softline
have a counterpart in reality, Virgil's explanation 'glosses' the dream as it explains the coming of \softline
Lucy, while Dante slept, at the solar aurora, nine hours after he had seen the lunar aurora.  \softline
Sometime after dawn she began her ascent with Dante in her arms, leaving their companions in \softline
ante-purgatory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   St. Lucy remains one of the more problematic presences in Dante's poem.  Exactly \softline
who is she and why is she so important to him?  Most commentators take her to be the early-fourth-century martyr from Syracuse, killed while Diocletian was emperor ca. A.D. 304.  She is \softline
usually associated with the well-being of the eyes, and this may have had some resonance for \softline
Dante who, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.ix.15, reports a severe bout of eye trouble in the same year that he \softline
was composing his ode 'Amor che ne la mente mi ragiona.'  For whatever reason (and we shall \softline
probably never know it), Dante was obviously particularly devoted to the cult of this saint.  She \softline
has a presence in three major scenes in the work, the 'prologue in heaven' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.97-108), the \softline
transport of Dante while he sleeps in this canto, and the prospect of the inhabitants of the \softline
'stadium-rose' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.137).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Fourth Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Textual Criticism of the "Convivio" and \softline
Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1917)]), pp. 235-55, addresses the problem of \softline
an allegorical understanding of Lucy.  Does she represent 'illuminating grace'? 'cooperating grace'?  \softline
Gradually Moore undermines both these allegorical formulations and moves toward the notion of \softline
Lucy as Dante's 'patron saint' (p. 241), offering in evidence the phrase 'il tuo fedele' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.98) \softline
that reappears variously (Dante as Beatrice's 'fedele' in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.134; Bernard as Mary's \softline
'faithful one' in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.102) to suggest that the expression 'implies the relation of one person \softline
to another person }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 as such}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and not as a symbol or type' (p. 243).  It was important that a reader \softline
like Moore, who still believed in the allegorical formulations that equated Virgil with Human \softline
Reason and Beatrice with Revelation or the Church (or, as Moore adds [p. 243], 'or whatever it \softline
be'), finds himself wanting to be rid of the rather fanciful associations that had previously been \softline
forced upon St. Lucy.  More recently Jacoff and Stephany (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Americana: "Inferno" \softline
II}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989]), pp. 29-38, crediting Pasquazi ("Il canto \softline
II dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno: letture degli anni 1973-{\u8216\'91}76}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Silvio Zennaro, Casa di Dante in \softline
Roma [Roma: Bonacci, 1977 (1974)]), pp. 35-65) for his important contribution before them, try \softline
to restore the importance of the cardinal virtue fortitude in Dante's fashioning of the meaning of \softline
Saint Lucy.  See also Anthony Cassell ("Santa Lucia as Patroness of Sight: Hagiography, \softline
Iconography, and Dante," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  109 [1991], pp. 71-88).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Little sense has been made out of the fact that in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.v.10-18 Dante invents two \softline
imaginary cities, which he designates Maria and Lucia, situated at the north and south poles \softline
respectively.  Is it significant that Lucy appears here, at the south pole, where, in the previous \softline
work, there stands an imaginary city bearing her name?  For recognition of the problem \softline
represented by those two cities, without attempts at a solution, see Poletto (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.97-99 -- and Poletto seems to have been the only commentator, at least among the seventy currently \softline
gathered in the DDP, to mention this intriguing passage), Jacoff and Stephany (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
Americana: "Inferno" II}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989]), pp. 32-33.  And \softline
now see Cornish (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Reading Dante's Stars}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000]), pp. 73-75.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's line, 'poi ella e 'l sonno ad una se n'andaro' (then she and sleep, as one, \softline
departed) reminded Vellutello (comm. to vv. 64-69) of the end of the dream in Cicero's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Somnium \softline
Scipionis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VI.29): 'Ille discessit, Ego somnio solutus sum' (He departed, and I was released from \softline
sleep).  Gabriele (comm. to this verse) had earlier signalled this resonance, and added also that of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.67, 'nox Aenean somnusque reliquit' (night and sleep both left Aeneas), a passage \softline
also cited by his student, Bernardino Daniello, discussing this verse.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-67.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A final simile prepares us for the entrance to purgatory proper, comparing Dante \softline
to one who moves from dubiety to confidence, a movement that required that he reinterpret the \softline
dream and his associations in a positive light.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   At almost the precise midpoint of the canto Dante situates his second address to \softline
the reader of this}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.19-21 for the first).  It has caused two major \softline
interpretive problems, twice dividing its readers into two basic groups.  First, there are those who \softline
believe that it speaks of an increase of quality in the artistry employed by the poet, while others \softline
contend that it speaks rather of an increase of quantity.  This dispute is most readily understood \softline
by referring to translations of the poem; those in the first group have Dante say that he will \softline
employ better art; those in the second, more of it.  The early commentators, here represented by \softline
Benvenuto, think of the more elevated matter of purgatory needing to be supported by 'fictionibus \softline
magis artificiosis et sententiosis' (more elaborately worked and more highly signifying fictions).  \softline
Or, in another formulation, the art to describe the higher mystery represented by the portal of \softline
purgatory proper needs to be more artful (in this case allegorical) than at other times, but not \softline
necessarily more beautiful, the eventual Romantic view, yet one that is found even in John of \softline
Serravalle (comm. to these verses), who argues that the poem must from here on be more \softline
beautiful.  Costa (comm. to verse 71) continues Benvenuto's spirit: the reader should not be \softline
surprised, in his opinion, that, as Dante says, 'io cerco di sostenere con pi{\f3 \'6a} artificiose parole la \softline
materia sublime di che favello' (I seek to reinforce the sublime matter of which I speak with more \softline
elaborately worked words).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab A second question remains: does this heightening reflect just the scene that follows (as in \softline
the opinion of a minority, all responding to these verses, e.g., Tozer; Momigliano; Porena; \softline
Sapegno, who has a foot in both camps; Mattalia, or so it would seem; Giacalone; while Bosco \softline
insists that the phrase refers to both 'arty' halves of the canto), or all of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that is to \softline
come?  For the latter opinion see Francesco da Buti (comm. to vv. 64-72), who argues that, since \softline
the subject is now penitence, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 that}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is the higher matter that requires more art; in one form or \softline
another, this is the position taken by most commentators.  In the opinion of this writer, the \softline
address to the reader refers to the description of the gate, its warder, and the three steps in the rite \softline
of confession, all of which need to be understood in the tradition of the allegory of the poets, as \softline
we shall see.  It regards, in other words, matter both local and temporary.  In a similar vein see \softline
Vazzana ({\u8220\'93}Il Canto IX del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio: letture degli anni 1976-{\u8216\'91}79}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Silvio \softline
Zennaro, Casa di Dante in Roma [Roma: Bonacci, 1981]), pp. 177-80, arguing that what is at \softline
stake is the allegorical nature of what immediately follows.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 80.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The angel is seated not }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 upon}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (as some translate) the highest step but }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 above}{\plain \fs24 \f1  it, as will \softline
become clear from verse 104, where we learn that he is seated on the threshold of the gate with \softline
his feet upon the third step.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beginning with Scartazzini/Vandelli (comm. to vv. 79-84), commentators resort to \softline
the Bible (Matthew 28:3) for the stern brightness of the angelic countenance: 'Erat autem aspectus \softline
ejus sicut fulgur' (His countenance was as the lightning).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The warder's sword is 'the sign of one who has authority to pronounce sentence,' in \softline
the words of Singleton (comm. to this verse), citing Benvenuto da Imola.  Singleton goes on to 
add that it is also 'reminiscent of the Cherubim with the flaming sword that were placed to guard \softline
Eden after Adam and Eve were driven forth.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The warder's words of challenge, 'Dite costinci' (Say it from there) repeat, as many \softline
note, the challenge of one of the centaurs to the approach of Virgil and Dante (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.63) and, \softline
like that one, probably reflect Charon's similar words (fare age... iam istinc [tell me... right where \softline
you are]) to the invading Aeneas in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.389, as Daniello (comm. to vv. 85-87) was perhaps \softline
the first to note.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 86-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This scene represents an epitomizing replay of Virgil's and Dante's encounter with \softline
the guardian of all purgatory, Cato (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.40-93): challenge by the guarding presence, who \softline
wants to know if some higher authority permits this visit; Virgil's response indicating a female \softline
who had sent these 'pilgrims' on their journey (this time with no attempt to flatter the warder); the \softline
warder's courteous acceptance of the aspirants' desire to enter a sacred precinct.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The allegory of the three steps should be less difficult than it has proven to be.  \softline
Considering this problem, Carroll (comm. to these verses) cites Milton, describing the gate of \softline
heaven (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradise Lost}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.516): 'Each stair mysteriously was meant.'  But what exactly does each \softline
of Dante's steps 'mean'?  Catholic doctrine, as variously expressed, presents the path to absolution \softline
from sin as running, in the Sacrament of Penance, from }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 contrition}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the recognition and heartfelt \softline
rejection of a sin) to }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 confession}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (of the sin, voiced to a priest), to }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 satisfaction}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (in the promise to \softline
perform an act of penance as ordered by that priest, thus showing the genuineness of the \softline
confession).  This is the psychologically correct order as well as the one given by 'Scholastic and \softline
other Church writers uniformly' (Moore [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Second Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 [1899]), p. 47), i.e., one is contrite, confesses, and then performs acts \softline
that will lead to }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 absolution}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , in the culmination of the sacrament.  Dante's first commentators are, \softline
however, more or less evenly divided as to whether the three steps found here represent, in \softline
sequence, (1) contrition, (2) confession, (3) satisfaction (this group is saving Dante from himself, \softline
as it were, i.e., they record what he }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 should}{\plain \fs24 \f1  have said) or (1) confession, (2) contrition, (3) \softline
satisfaction.  Holding for the first order see the Ottimo (comm. to vv. 94-95), Benvenuto (comm. \softline
to vv. 94-99), Anonimo Fiorentino (comm. to vv. 94-96), Serravalle (comm. to vv. 106-108); (2): \softline
Lana (comm. to vv. 76-77), Pietro (Pietro1, comm. to verse 76), Buti (comm. to vv. 94-105), \softline
Andreoli (comm. to verse 94).  However, it is fairly clear from the text that Dante has reinvented \softline
the order to suit his own purpose, beginning with confession and only then proceeding to \softline
contrition.  That this is almost certainly true is confirmed by a later text, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXI.31-90, \softline
which offers a carefully orchestrated presentation of Dante's own penance before Beatrice, with \softline
the steps of that paralleling the steps found here, namely, confession, contrition, satisfaction, in \softline
that order.  Moore also points out that Dante's presentation of the third stage, satisfaction, is \softline
unorthodox, since he represents it as the love that came from Christ's self-sacrifice.  Thus, in \softline
Dante's scheme, the sinner first confesses his sin, then feels true contrition for it, and then moves \softline
beyond it in his imitation of and love for Christ.  Why he should have wanted to repackage the \softline
elements of what was a standard body of doctrine and belief is not a subject that has received \softline
adequate attention.  But we should not be surprised to find that this poet remakes any text or any \softline
doctrine to his own liking and for his own reasons.  The one element that does run through \softline
Dante's version of this sacrament is that its priestly element is curtailed in favor of inward 
recognition and performance on the part of the sinner, i.e., confession in Dante seems more a \softline
private form of self-recognition than is generally the case, contrition contains mainly internal \softline
elements (if it must eventually be given voice), and satisfaction seems more attitudinal than \softline
performative.  It also seems that Dante has moved elements of satisfaction into the second stage \softline
of the process, contrition.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to verse 130) is alone in referring to Psalm 99:4: 'Introite \softline
portas eius in confessione' (100:4, Enter his gates confessing your trust), as reflecting the situation \softline
here in the poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Some years ago Gregory Curfman (Princeton '68) suggested that the 'narrative' told by the \softline
three steps offered an epitome of the history of the human race: purity, sin, redemption.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For convincing disagreement with the notion that the steps actually represent not the \softline
process of the Sacrament of Penance but three stages in the sinner's contrition see Bosco/Reggio \softline
(comm. to verse 94).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first step, of white marble, serves as a mirror to the protagonist and thus \softline
seems associated with confession.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The second, darker than the purple-black of the color perse and broken by a \softline
cruciform crack, represents the sinner's recognition of his 'broken' state.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The third, red with the color of spurting blood reminiscent of the sacrifice of \softline
Jesus Christ, is, like the first, of a stone of lofty character, porphyry (the second seems to be \softline
humble geological matter indeed), and suggests the sacrifice the sinner must make in imitation of \softline
the great sacrifice made by Christ.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Only recently have commentators to this passage (Mattalia, Fallani, Bosco) \softline
turned, for the source of Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 diamante,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to Ezechiel's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 adamantem}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , when God gives his prophet \softline
a stony forehead to wear against his enemies (Ezek. 3:9).  And since the priestly angel, seated \softline
upon the adamant threshold, is iconographically related to St. Peter, a number of commentators \softline
think of Matthew 16:18: 'You are Peter and upon this rock will I build my church.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Either in December 1310 at Vercelli or in January 1311 at Milano, Dante was \softline
apparently presented to the new emperor, Henry VII (see Frugoni's notes in his edition of Dante's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistles}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , p. 564).  Dante himself reports that he embraced the emperor's feet (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.9).  It is \softline
at least conceivable that this verse remembers that experience, especially since, if it was written \softline
after the event, it was probably written soon after it.  Once again we are unable to be certain, \softline
because of the uncertainties that attend dating the stages of the poem's composition.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's threefold beating of his chest has been glossed, since the time of the Ottimo \softline
(comm. to vv. 106-111), as signifying 'mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa.'  Andrea Lancia \softline
(the probable author of that commentary) proceeds, followed in this, as well, by many later \softline
commentators, to say that these three in turn signify three kinds of sin: sins of thought, of the \softline
tongue, and in deed.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The seven P's, generally understood as deriving from the first letter of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 peccata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (sins), 
evidently stand for the seven mortal sins (or capital vices), but here, since the protagonist has \softline
learned to hate sin, they stand for what remains of the predisposition to these seven vices that is \softline
inherited by every mortal through Adam's (and Eve's) original sin.  For the P's as deriving from \softline
the letter }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tau}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Sarolli ("Noterella biblica sui sette P.," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  34 [1957]), pp. 217-22, \softline
arguing for a source in Ezekiel 9:2-6, where God commands a scribe to write that letter -- as a \softline
positive sign in that case -- on the foreheads of all the inhabitants of Jerusalem who repent the \softline
abominations done in the city.  In the following slaughter of the rest of the inhabitants, only \softline
Jeremiah and the other just Jerusalemites are preserved.  See also Revelation 7:3, for the true \softline
believers who bear the sign of God on their foreheads, as well as Revelation 13:16 and 20:4, \softline
where those who worship the Beast have }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  sign on their foreheads.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For some time now a debate among the commentators has involved the question of \softline
whether or not others on the mountain possess these P's (i.e., whether or not the P's on Dante's \softline
forehead are unique).  Two differing reasons help us to be fairly certain that they are in fact \softline
unique to him, the first one positive: Dante is the sole visitor to purgatory who climbs there in the \softline
flesh; his uniqueness thus has this further sign.  Second, and arguing from negative evidence, one \softline
may say that, since no other character is ever observed bearing these stigmata, one may \softline
reasonably conclude that none has them.  One may imagine the various human scenes that the \softline
poet could have developed, as various characters on the mountain compared P's with Dante, etc.  \softline
He simply did not choose to handle his material in that way and those who wonder whether others \softline
bear P's on their foreheads have simply invented a problem.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.22-24.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Sin as a 'wound' is a biblical topos (see Isaiah 1:6 [first noted by Scartazzini (comm. \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.28)], Psalm 38:11 [39:10 -- as noted by Singleton (comm. to this verse)].\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-116.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The color of the warder's garments is the gray of ashes and gives expression to \softline
his humility, despite his high office.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 117-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Sensible allegorical expositions of the two keys are found variously, but of \softline
particular use is Poletto's gloss (to vv. 115-117).  The golden key denotes the authority to absolve \softline
granted by Christ directly; the silver, the judgment necessary in the priest to be sure the penitent is \softline
truly deserving of absolution.  Poletto cites passages in St. Thomas to show Dante's closeness to \softline
them in this part of his description of the process of entering purgatory (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Summa Th}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ., III, Suppl., \softline
qq. 17-20).  Once the priest has judged the penitent ready for absolution (using his silver key), he \softline
then uses the golden one to complete the opening of the door.  The priest, of course, may err in \softline
wanting to allow an unfit soul to enter; in that case the golden key will not turn in the lock -- but \softline
even so, God is disposed to err on the side of mercy and will overrule a prelate who is niggardly \softline
in pardoning.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The fact that a priest may err in his judgment makes it disturbing that this figure is \softline
presented as being literally an angel (who thus should be free of such weak discernment).  It \softline
would seem more logical if we dealt here with an allegorical figure, Priestliness, the Petrine \softline
warder of the gate, a composite figure representing a class, not a particular historical being.  And, \softline
indeed, the angel does not behave in any other way.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 131-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Christ's words to his disciples (Luke 9:62): 'Nemo mittens manum suam ad 
aratrum, et respiciens retro, aptus est regno Dei' (No man, having put his hand to the plough, and \softline
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God).  This apt passage has been cited in this connection \softline
since the time of Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to these verses).  While Lot's wife (Genesis \softline
19:17; 19.26) may also be remembered here, the passage from Luke's gospel is more closely \softline
related.  The same may be said for the resonance of Orpheus's backward glance at Eurydice.  \softline
Luke's passage, insisting that a backward glance will cost the kingdom of Heaven, is perfectly a \softline
propos (as Timothy Hampton, then a graduate student at Princeton, suggested in 1984) because it \softline
alone has the object that may be lost ahead of (rather than behind) its seeker.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the first part of one of the most difficult canto endings in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine \softline
Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  These lines remember a terrible moment of Roman history, while the second part (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IX.139-145) reflects the musical practice of Dante's day.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For hundreds of years Rome had kept a part of its treasure secure from any use, locked \softline
behind a portal that was never opened, until Caesar, in order to fund his pursuit of Pompey and \softline
Cato in 49 B.C., broke into the treasury and looted it, overcoming the resistance of a single brave \softline
republican, Metellus, loyal to Pompey.  Dante's source here is the violently republican Lucan \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.108-168).  It is worth reading the entire passage, which most commentators apparently \softline
do not do, for it drips with sarcasm about Julius Caesar, from its inception, in which Caesar, \softline
having marched on Rome and conquered by arms, has become everything and the senate has \softline
become a mouthpiece for this 'private man,' to its conclusion, in which the city is portrayed as \softline
being poorer than the one man who rules her as a result of his plundering the temple of Saturn, \softline
her treasury.  There is nothing good here about Caesar, despite Dante's respect for him as the \softline
person he considered the first emperor of Rome (see Stull and Hollander, "The Lucanian Source \softline
of Dante's Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  63 [1991 (1997)], pp. 33-43, for Dante's mainly negative, if \softline
mixed, views of Julius in the poem).  And thus the sound that sounds so shrilly at Dante's entrance \softline
into purgatory is reminiscent of what, for Lucan and for Dante, is perhaps the nadir of Roman \softline
history, the accession of Caesar and the destruction of the republic.  For Dante's fervent belief in \softline
the republican virtues and form of government see Hollander and Rossi ("Dante's Republican \softline
Treasury," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  104 [1986], pp. 59-82).  Along with the passage in Lucan, undoubtedly \softline
Dante's main source here, Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 133-135) brings into play }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
VI.573-574: tum demum horrisono stridentes cardine sacrae / panduntur portae (then at last, \softline
grating on their hinges, the impious gates swing open).  Virgil is describing the gates of Tartarus, \softline
swinging open (the Sibyl and Aeneas do not enter, but she does tell him of the horrors of the \softline
punishments therein).  Here, too, we can see how Dante has juxtaposed two similar objects, the \softline
gates of Tartarus, the pagans' hell, and those of purgatory, and make the reader aware of the \softline
crucial similarity that marks their utter difference.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab What is the effect of such negative reminiscences as the protagonist begins to attain the \softline
Promised Land?  One must conclude that we are dealing here with antithesis: as brutally shrill as \softline
was the sound of the squealing doors of the temple of Saturn, of the gates of Tartarus, exactly so \softline
terribly loud is the rare victory of a penitent being allowed to enter the kingdom of Heaven -- or \softline
its vestibule.  What was tragic in its consequence for Rome is marked by a sound exactly as loud \softline
and grating as this one that announces the victory of a new (and better) Caesar who enters not \softline
against the will of the warder, but in accord with it.  Only the sounds are similar; all else is \softline
changed.  And, as we have seen occur several times in the first half of this canto, tragic classical \softline
myth or history gives way to comic Christian narrative.  In the words of Jesus (Luke 12:34), 
'There where your treasure is, there your heart is also.'  Caesar's treasure is far different from the \softline
treasure in Heaven sought and found by only relatively few Christians, their low numbers \softline
suggested by the infrequent screechings of this gate.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As for the positive resolution for the unpleasant sound of the opening gate, Denise \softline
Heilbronn ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concentus musicus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : The Creaking Hinges of Dante's Gate of Purgatory," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rivista di \softline
studi italiani}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1984], pp. 1-15) points out that medieval concepts of musical 'sweetness' had \softline
more to do with harmony than with the sounds themselves.  She (p. 4) gives the examples of the \softline
hurdy-gurdy and drum, both of which would hardly seem to be 'sweet' to modern ears, but did to \softline
those of the time who recorded their responses.  This point is a pivotal one for those who cannot \softline
bring themselves to see how the grating screech of a gate can be in harmony with another sound.  \softline
Yet when we reflect, along with Heilbronn, that what the gate's sound announces is very sweet \softline
indeed, we may begin to understand Dante's strategy here.  M.A. Buchanan ("At the Gate of \softline
Purgatory [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX, 130-145, X, 1-6]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  25 [1948], pp. 6-7) points out that there are three \softline
musical moments in the scene: the roaring of the hinges, the harmonious singing of the angels who \softline
are apparently within the gates, and the sound of the gate closing behind Dante in the fourth verse \softline
of the next canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 134.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The noun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 regge}{\plain \fs24 \f1  represents a relatively rare term (one never used elsewhere by \softline
Dante) for the main portal of a church.  Denise Heilbronn ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concentus musicus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : The Creaking \softline
Hinges of Dante's Gate of Purgatory," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rivista di studi italiani}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1984]), p. 5, suggests that 'like a \softline
cathedral door, the gate of purgatory is the mystical image of the gate of heaven.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139-145.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This passage, too, has caused a great deal of difficulty.  Denise Heilbronn \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concentus musicus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : The Creaking Hinges of Dante's Gate of Purgatory," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rivista di studi \softline
italiani}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1984], pp. 1-15), a Dante scholar with a musical background, has dealt with a number \softline
of the issues that have puzzled readers and offers a helpful review of the extensive discussion.  \softline
Some of the essential matters in dispute involve the words }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tuono}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 voce}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 suono}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 organo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab According to her, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tuono}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (understood as 'a note' and not as 'thunder') should be seen as \softline
positive, since it is the sound that accompanies a soul's entrance into purgatory; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 voce}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 suono}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
are, respectively, technical terms for the human voice and an inanimate, instrumental sound (pp. \softline
6-7), while }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 organo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  refers either to polyphonic singing or singing accompanied by an organ.  \softline
Heilbronn is illuminating about the use of impressively large organs in churches in the tenth and \softline
eleventh centuries (pp. 8-10).  However, some contemporary scholars have moved back to the \softline
notion of the first commentators that the phrase 'singing with organs' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantar con organi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) referred \softline
to vocal music sung polyphonically, no modern commentator more convincingly than Fallani \softline
(comm. to verse }{\plain \fs24 \f1 144), revisiting a conference paper given by Casimiri in 1925.  But counter-arguments by Giacalone (comm. to vv. 142-146) and Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 144-145) seem \softline
even more convincing.  Giacalone points out that Dante himself had described an organist as \softline
accompanying a song (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.viii.5-6) and Bosco/Reggio, influenced by the \softline
paper given by Damilano in 1974, remind us that one of Dante's commentators, Cristoforo \softline
Landino (1481), grandnephew of the famous organist Francesco Landino, is of the opinion that \softline
the practice was to alternate passages of singing and organ-playing in church services and that this \softline
is referred to by Dante here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante believes he hears the words of a hymn being sung (and we must imagine that, if \softline
there was actual singing to greet his coming [Dante only says that he }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 seemed}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to hear voices], it 
was done by angels, since the penitents we eventually see in the next canto, the prideful, are bent \softline
under their weights and far from lyrical).  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Te Deum laudamus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has an interesting history in the \softline
commentaries.  (For the text of the hymn in Latin and English see Singleton, comm. to verse 140.)  \softline
Benvenuto, responding to vv. 139-140, claims that St. Ambrose wrote this hymn after he had \softline
served as St. Augustine's spiritual doctor and cured him of his terrible errors (in Milan shortly \softline
before Augustine's conversion); it is thus, Benvenuto continues, a most fitting accompaniment to \softline
Dante's -- another great intellect's -- turning to penance.  Other early commentators also associate \softline
the hymn with Augustine's conversion, whether it was sung while he was being baptized or \softline
spoken by Ambrose in his sermon on that occasion or, indeed, according to Francesco da Buti, \softline
spontaneously spoken responsively by these two great men on that day.  While in our time it is not \softline
believed to have been composed by Ambrose, in Dante's it was.  That Dante should have chosen \softline
to present himself, entering purgatory, as a new (and better) Julius Caesar and as the new \softline
Augustine is both altogether extraordinary and completely Dantean.  For the opinion that Dante \softline
presents himself as being like Augustine in the sins he must conquer, lust and bad philosophizing, \softline
see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), \softline
p. 165n.\par
}}