{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 12}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante and Oderisi are continuing their movement forward in humility, purging their \softline
pride in their differing ways until such time as Virgil will insist on Dante's pursuing other \softline
instruction.  Strictly speaking, in ancient Greece a 'pedagogue' was a slave whose task it was to \softline
guide children to school and supervise their conduct generally (but not to teach them); in ancient \softline
Rome the slave was frequently a Greek and had similar responsibilities, but also introduced the \softline
children to the beginning study of Greek.  Dante's word,}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  pedagogo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , here in one of its first \softline
appearances in the Italian vernacular, according to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Grande Dizionario}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , has a brief but \softline
important role (occurring twice) in a single biblical passage, Paul's Epistle to the Galatians 3:24-25 (Longfellow [comm. to verse 3] seems to have been the first to note the possible connection).  \softline
In that passage Paul imagines us as having once been, under the Old Testament, guided by the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 paedagogus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the Law) but as now being taught by Christ, and thus as no longer requiring such \softline
guidance.  This Dantean hapax (a word occurring only once in a given universe of words) may \softline
reflect that biblical near-hapax.  (Perhaps it should be noted that, two cantos farther on [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XIV.85], Dante fairly evidently cites another passage in Galatians [Gal. 6.8] -- see Moore [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies \softline
in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Scripture and Classical Authors in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 \softline
[1896]), p. 332].  If he does, its use here involves a certain apparently gratuitous downgrading of \softline
Virgil's admonitions, so frequently before us in this canto.  Their frequency is observed by Giulio \softline
Marzot ["}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le Monnier, 1967), pp. \softline
405-33], in whose opinion this canto is 'il canto delle ammonizioni' [p. 422].)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the yoke that binds these two 'oxen' see the commentary of Fallani (comm. to this \softline
passage) and Scott's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lectura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ("Canto XII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges \softline
G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), p. 174: 'For my yoke is easy and my \softline
burden light' (Matthew 11:29-30) -- the words of Christ preaching to potential followers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's metaphor is probably developed, as Bosco/Reggio (1978) insist, on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
III.520: 'velorum pandimus alas' (we spread the wings of our sails), a passage cited by many \softline
commentators at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.125, 'de' remi facemmo ali' (we turned our oars to wings).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Petrocchi, in his reading of the line, overturns the previously favored opinion that Dante's \softline
text read }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vele}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (sails), but has the disadvantage of forcing the poet into a very mixed metaphor, \softline
'wings and oars.'  We would have followed the older reading, 'sails and oars.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist walks erect, as Ovid describes humans doing so as to be \softline
distinguished from brutes (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.84-86).  Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 4-9) cites Ovid's words \softline
and mentions the additional authority of Cicero, Sallust, and Juvenal on this matter.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scemi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which we have translated as 'shrunken,' has caused some discomfort.  \softline
What exactly does it mean?  Marcello Aurigemma ("Il Canto XII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove \softline
letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le Monnier, 1970]), pp. 109-10, claims that Oderisi's dour \softline
prophecy of Dante's future ills (XI.140-141) leaves the protagonist feeling }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 monco}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (incomplete) \softline
until such time as that disaster will finally confront him.  He is following the nearly unanimous \softline
view found in the earliest commentators.  However, since the time of Landino (1481) the more \softline
usual interpretation relates Dante's interior moral posture rather to his responses to Pride, whether \softline
in pity for the souls he now sees or in recognition of his own (former) pridefulness}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  -- }{\plain \fs24 \f1 the most \softline
usual version of that position today, expressed in the form that currently rules by Torraca in 1905 
(comm. to these verses), noting the 'heavy swelling' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.119) of pride that Dante is getting \softline
under control.  As a result, his thoughts are }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scemi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in that they are lacking in pride.  In other \softline
words, even if he has finally straightened up and begun walking as a confident human being, his \softline
thoughts remain bowed under the burden of the recognition of his pridefulness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's new incredible lightness of being matches Virgil's usual state as soul \softline
unencumbered by body; getting his pride under control, the protagonist experiences the greatest \softline
and quickest spiritual growth we will observe in him during his ascent of the mountain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Now that Dante has experienced and embraced the positive exemplars of Humility, \softline
Virgil wants to confirm his new state by making him experience the negative exemplars of Pride in \softline
order to seal his 'conversion' to humility.  For exemplarity in the middle ages and in Dante see \softline
Delcorno (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Exemplum e letteratura tra medioevo e rinascimento}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bologna: Il Mulino, 1989]), esp. \softline
Ch. VI, "Dante e Peraldo," pp. 195-227.  And for his discussion of the exemplars in this canto as \softline
deriving in part from William Peraldus's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Summa vitiorum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see pp. 210-14; Delcorno shows that \softline
Dante's list of six biblical exemplars of Pride is related to Peraldus's first seven in his list of twelve \softline
biblical exemplars.  Dante shares five of his six with Peraldus, substituting (for Adam) Nimrod (a \softline
choice, one might add, that underlines the poet's understandable concern with language}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  -- }{\plain \fs24 \f1 see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.67).  Then, in typical Dantean fashion, he adds six pagan exemplars to his \softline
shortened and revised version of Peraldus's list.  For perhaps the first modern recognition of the \softline
importance of Peraldus's listing and description of the vices for Dante, see Wenzel ("Dante's \softline
Rationale for the Seven Deadly Sins [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  60 [1965], \softline
pp. 529-33), pointing out that Pietro di Dante's commentary to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII relies strictly and \softline
extensively upon Peraldus's phrasing (wherever he found his version of Peraldus's text) for his \softline
description of the seven mortal sins (comms. to vv. 97-99; 100-102; 112-114; 115-117; 118-123).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For consideration of the history of the classification of the capital vices see Morton W. \softline
Bloomfield (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Seven Deadly Sins}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [East Lansing: Michigan State College Press, 1952]); for \softline
Dante's classifications see Edward Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Second Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous \softline
Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1899)], pp. 152-208).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The figured pavement upon which the travelers walk is compared in simile to the \softline
gravestones set into church floors bearing the indications of the dead person's profession, family, \softline
or other identifying trait, as well as his or her likeness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As was the case with God's art found in the intaglios upon the mountainside, here \softline
too divine art knows no human equal (cf. }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.32-33).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Reading down the left-hand margin of the verses, we find a series of repeated \softline
letters beginning a series of tercets.  They spell out a word.  Lia Baldelli, "acrostico" (}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ED.1970.1, \softline
p. 44), points out that perception of Dante's deployment of this technique escaped the attention of \softline
the early commentators; it was only in 1898 that Antonio Medin noticed the presence of the \softline
acrostic in these lines, the word VOM [or UOM, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 uomo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or 'man'], while the presence of a similar \softline
acrostic, found at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.115-141, yielding LVE [or LUE, 'plague'], was only noted by \softline
Francesco Flamini in 1903.  Most now accept the fact, despite a perhaps understandable modern \softline
distaste for such contrivance, that these two acrostics were deliberately constructed by the author 
(see, for more on Dante's acrostic proclivities, John Scott ["Canto XII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone (Florence: Cesati, 2001), \softline
p. 176 and n.].  Spurred by these findings, others have tried to establish a wider pattern of such \softline
things, e.g., Deroy ("Un acrostico nella preghiera di San Bernardo," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellanea dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Utrecht: Het Spectrum, 1965], pp. 103-13): }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.19-33 (IOSEP [for Joseph, the \softline
earthly father of Jesus]); Berk ("Some Sibylline Verses in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X and XII,"  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
90 [1972], pp. 59-76): }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.67-75 (DIQ = DIO, to contrast with VOM = UOM in}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  this}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
passage); Kay ("Dante's Acrostic Allegations: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI-XII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  21 [1980], pp. 29-30): \softline
acrostics are everywhere, e.g., (Kay's first example) }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.1-7 (LNQ = }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L}{\plain \fs24 \f1 uca}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 N}{\plain \fs24 \f1 o in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Q}{\plain \fs24 \f1 uarto \softline
= }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De bello civili}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.12-16); and Taylor ("From }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 superbo Il{\f3 \'56}{\f3 \'62}n}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 umile Italia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ": The Acrostic of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  19," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  7 [1987], pp. 47-65): }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.128-129 (adding two \softline
letters [IM] to LUE = LUEIM, an anagram for UMILE, 'humble').  For a withering sceptical \softline
response to these ingenious efforts see Teodolinda Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine "Comedy": \softline
Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992]), pp. 308-10.   Nonetheless, \softline
Kay's article offers a useful compendium (p. 26) of treatments of acrostics in various \softline
encyclopedias and dictionaries of classical and medieval learning.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a discussion of negative critical reactions to the acrostic on aesthetic grounds, as well \softline
as of its function in its context here, see Marcello Aurigemma ("Il Canto XII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le Monnier, 1970]), pp. 113-19.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Naturally, the first exemplar of the sin of pride is Satan, its avatar (see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.28-33 for his association with those other emblems of Pride, the giants who stormed \softline
Olympus).  He is intrinsically opposed to the first exemplar of humility, the Virgin Mary, as is \softline
evident.  When Dante drew near to the end of his poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.2), he underlined this with \softline
a verse in description of Mary, 'umile e alta pi{\f3 \'6a} che creatura' (humble and exalted more than any \softline
creature), reflecting his description of (the unnamed) Lucifer here, who was more noble when he \softline
was created than any other creature.  Trucchi (comm. to this passage) observes Dante's borrowing \softline
from the Bible, his 'folgoreggiando scender' (fall like lightning from the sky) echoing the similar \softline
phrase in Luke 10:18: 'Satanam, sicut fulgur de coelo cadentem' ([I beheld] Satan as lightning fall \softline
from heaven).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We finally catch a glimpse of Briareus, so important an absence in the amusing \softline
business that occupies Dante and Virgil in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXI.97-105 (and see the corresponding \softline
note), when Virgil denies Dante the sight of this giant, whom he has described, in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as \softline
having fifty heads and one hundred arms.  Dante makes him, from what we can see, an 'ordinary' \softline
giant, a pagan version of Lucifer for his presumption in challenging Jove.  Briareus is mentioned \softline
in the three major martial epics that Dante knew and used, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.565, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.596, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Pharsalia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.596.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Uniquely among the twelve sets of exemplars, the non-exemplary figures are the \softline
ones named (Apollo by his epithet Thymbraeus, Minerva by her second name [Pallas], and Mars), \softline
those who witnessed the defeat of the unnamed, exemplary giants (including Briareus), undone by \softline
the thunderbolts of Jove, their father.  These exemplars are, in a wonderfully appropriate \softline
'punishment,' present only as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 disiecta membra}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the scattered remains of the outsized human \softline
creatures they once were.  Because of the relationship between these two non-biblical scenes, they 
are described one after the other.  However, we cannot be certain whether all six biblical and all \softline
six classical scenes are paired in parallel rows or whether, in this and the following examples, the \softline
order within the pairs is switched from the first occurrence, as indeed seems to be the case.  The \softline
reason for such an arrangement would seem to have been in order to head the list with Lucifer, \softline
but then to have the general pattern be based on a pagan followed by a biblical exemplar.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For Nimrod, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXI.70-81.  He is accompanied by those \softline
who helped build the Tower of Babel on the plains of Shinar.  And see Genesis 10:8-10; 11:1-4.  \softline
Described as looking as if he were bewildered by the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 smarrito}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , used a dozen times in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and most often to refer to the protagonist's condition of being lost, bewildered, or \softline
astray, Nimrod may eventually reflect the poet if he felt that he had tried to storm Olympus by \softline
writing this poem, a mere Babelic outpouring of language if it is not redeemed by God's grace.  \softline
Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine "Comedy": Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1992]), pp. 51, 115, 283, argues that Nimrod, Ulysses, and Phaeton are}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  -- }{\plain \fs24 \f1 uniquely}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  -- }{\plain \fs24 \f1 figures who \softline
appear or are mentioned in all three }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and are also associated with the theme of \softline
transgression; but see Stull and Hollander ("The Lucanian Source of Dante's Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  63 [1991 (1997)]), pp. 47-48, pointing out that Plato, Julius Caesar, and the \softline
inordinately non-transgressive Lavinia all fulfill Barolini's criteria for this category.  Nonetheless, \softline
Guy P. Raffa (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine Dialectic: Dante's Incarnational Poetry}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Toronto: Toronto University \softline
Press, 2000]), p. 58, apparently unaware of the facts in question, accepts Barolini's argument.  For \softline
a survey of hapax in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see Hollander ("An Index of Hapax Legomena in Dante's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  106 [1988], pp. 81-110).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Niobe was the wife of Amphion, king of Thebes, and mother of seven sons and \softline
seven daughters.  When she boasted that she was a better mother than Latona, who had but two \softline
offspring (even though these were Apollo and Diana), in the Ovidian world it is clear what will \softline
happen next: the two arrow-shooting siblings wipe out the children of Niobe who, turned to \softline
stone, nonetheless bewails their loss with eternal tears that flow perpetually as mountain streams \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.148-312).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Niobe's biblical counterpart is King Saul.  Relieved of his kingship by Samuel for \softline
failing to keep God's commands, Saul fought against the Philistines at Gilboa.  Mortally wounded \softline
and fearful of being captured by the enemy, he fell upon his sword (I Samuel 31:1-4).  David's \softline
subsequent curse on the surrounding mountains, the witnesses of this scene (II Samuel 1:21), asks \softline
that neither rain nor dew reach this place in Samaria.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This exemplar of a prideful suicide throws into sharp relief the far different suicide of Cato \softline
the Younger, with reference to which }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  opens.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Arachne's presumption took the form of a challenge to Minerva in weaving.  She \softline
(in this like Ovid himself? [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.5-145]) produced a brilliant representation of the love \softline
affairs of the gods.  Minerva, sensing herself unable to better this work of art, destroyed it, and \softline
Arachne determined to do away with herself.  Minerva saved her life and turned the rope by which \softline
she was hanging herself into filament for this weaver turned spider.  See Barolini ("Arachne, \softline
Argus, and St. John: Transgressive Art in Dante and Ovid," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Mediaevalia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13 [1987]), pp. 213-16, \softline
for the view that Arachne serves as a prideful stand-in for Ulysses (and potentially for Dante 
himself).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Rehoboam, a son of Solomon, was chosen to become king of Israel.  His pride \softline
was manifest in the way he scornfully refused to lessen the tribute demanded of his people, at \softline
which ten of the twelve tribes of Israel rebelled.  When his representative, Aduram, was slain by \softline
the rebellious Israelites, Rehoboam ran away with unseemly haste, even though he was not being \softline
pursued (see I Kings 12:1-18).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In Statius's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.187-213), Alcmaeon, son of Amphiaraus, the seer (who \softline
is, in a certain sense, a stand-in for Statius himself [see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.31-39]), is left with the \softline
task of avenging his father's death.  This came about after his wife, the mother of Alcmaeon, \softline
Eriphyle, betrayed his whereabouts to Polynices for the price of a necklace, with the result that \softline
Amphiaraus (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.31-36), who had foreseen the dreadful end of the civil war in Thebes \softline
and had hidden himself in order to escape his own death in it, ended up fighting and dying in the \softline
war.  He pledged his son to avenge him, which indeed he did do by slaying his own mother.  That \softline
the necklace, made by no less an artisan than Vulcan, had belonged to the goddess Harmonia \softline
marked Eriphyle's pride in thinking herself worthy of wearing it.  As was the case for Lucifer, the \softline
first exemplary figure in this listing, Eriphyle is not named.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Sennacherib, King of Assyria, B.C. 705-681; after a reign of twenty-four years, in \softline
the course of which he twice "went up against" Hezekiah, king of Judah, and besieged Jerusalem, \softline
he was assassinated, while at worship, by his two sons (II Kings 19:37)' (Toynbee, "Sennacherib" \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  The Vulgate (II Kings 19:28) associates his anti-Jewish behavior \softline
with }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 superbia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (pride).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In Paulus Orosius's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Historiae adversus paganos}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.vii.6) Dante could have read of \softline
Cyrus the Elder, founder and king of the Persian Empire ca. 560 B.C.  He died in battle against \softline
the Massagetae, in Scythia (529 B.C.), when he was ambushed by the queen of his enemies, \softline
Tomyris, who not only killed him, but had his decapitated head put into a vessel containing human \softline
blood and, according to Orosius, uttered words that closely resemble what Dante reports she said.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A victim of Hebrew decapitation at the hands of Judith was the Assyrian general \softline
Holofernes (see Judith 13:1-13).  'The leavings of that slaughter' are evidently the members of his \softline
decapitated body.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This last pair of classical/biblical parallels is painfully exact, with vainglorious military \softline
males opposed by skillful women who cut their heads off.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The final example serves as a sort of summary for the entire acrostic.  For the \softline
medieval tradition that Troy was indeed prideful see Scott ("Canto XII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), \softline
pp. 182-83.  Dante's phrasing probably reflects }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.2-3, 'superbum / Ilium,' with the phrase \softline
to be read in a moralizing ('proud Troy') rather than an architectural ('lofty-towered Troy') \softline
manner.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.75, discussing an earlier incidence of the same phenomenon.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again, concluding an ekphrastic presentation of some length (cf. }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.94-99), the poet intervenes, now to praise the extraordinary mimetic quality of God's art, so precise \softline
in its representation that even an eyewitness of the original events saw them no more clearly than \softline
did Dante as he walked the Terrace of Pride.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.121-129, in the wake of ekphrastic poetry, Dante addresses the \softline
prideful sinners among his readers; he now does a similar turn here, using the rhetorical trope of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 antiphrasis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , i.e., expressing the opposite of what one says by means of a sarcastic tone of voice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 77.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrase 'Drizza la testa' was last heard, addressed to Dante by Virgil as it is here, \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX.31, when the guide wanted his pupil to take cognizance of Amphiaraus (see the \softline
note to vv. 49-51).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 76-78) was perhaps the first to cite the similar incitement, \softline
offered by the Sibyl to Aeneas, found at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.37 ('non hoc ista sibi tempus spectacula poscit' \softline
[this hour demands other sights than these]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-80.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Singleton suggests (comm. to verse 80) that, since this is the only angel actually to \softline
move toward Dante, his gesture is meant to suggest humility.  However, as Simone Marchesi has \softline
pointed out, responding to a draft of these notes, the Angel of Mercy even more certainly seems \softline
to approach Dante (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.27-30).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The last signal of the time of day occurred at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.13-16, where we learned \softline
that it was sometime after 9am.  Here, in metaphoric language that presents the hours of the \softline
morning as the handmaids of the day, serving her highness one at a time and in succession, we \softline
learn that it is noon.  Thus the time spent on this terrace is surprisingly short, a maximum of less \softline
than three hours and as little as two.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the notion that Virgil's admonitions offer a major thematic component of this \softline
canto, see Giulio Marzot, "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le \softline
Monnier, 1967), p. 422, referring to this as 'il canto delle ammonizioni' (the canto of admonition).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That the angel comes as the morning star, Venus, otherwise known as Lucifer (as \softline
Benvenuto suggested (comm. to vv. 88-90), sets him off in a polar relationship to Satan, the first \softline
exemplar of prideful behavior in the figured pavement.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Who speaks these words, the angel of Humility or the poet?  The debate has been \softline
active for years.  Marcello Aurigemma ("Il Canto XII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture \softline
dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le Monnier, 1970]), pp. 123-25, after reviewing various arguments, \softline
opts for the notion that it is Dante who speaks.  The closeness of the sentiment expressed here to \softline
that found at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.121-129 (with its 'angelic butterfly' at verse 125), which issues from \softline
the poet's mouth, would seem to support the idea that it is the poet who speaks here as well.  \softline
Nonetheless, we have followed Petrocchi's punctuation, and it does not allow for the attribution \softline
of these lines to the poet.  The main arguments for doing so are that for Dante to allude so clearly \softline
to his own special election is, even for him, a bit bold; further, the lack of indication of a second \softline
and new speaker and the abruptness that would result from such a shift both argue for Petrocchi's 
view; still further, only the angel could state as a fact that so few are chosen to rise this far.  On \softline
the other hand, no other angel makes comments about humankind that are as harsh as these, since \softline
the seven angels of purgatory are celebrating the continuing ascent of this special visitor to the \softline
mountain.  Perhaps the fullest, fairest, and most helpful gloss to the passage is found in Poletto's \softline
commentary (1894) to these verses, and he, after careful debate, comes down on the side of the \softline
attribution of these words to the angel.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 98.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The angel's wing-clap has had a result that will only become known at vv. 121-126: \softline
one of the P's on Dante's brow has been removed.  This is perhaps another reason to believe that \softline
Dante has not spoken the last words, which might seem more self-congratulatory than humble.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The simile is redolent of the Florence left behind by the exiled poet.  The site of \softline
the church of San Miniato al Monte, which is set above and across the Arno from the city, \softline
afforded then (as it does now) one of the surpassingly beautiful views of Florence.  The \softline
Rubaconte bridge (now known as the Ponte alle Grazie) was named for its builder in 1237, the \softline
podest{\f3 \'42} Rubaconte da Mandello da Milano, according to Giovanni Villani's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cronica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VI.26).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The phrase 'the justly governed city' is obviously ironic.  For Dante's only use of this word \softline
see the last (and incomplete) sentence in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.xiv.2) where poets are seen as \softline
either writing in praise or in blame of their subjects, i.e. (among other categories), either \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gratulanter}{\plain \fs24 \f1  or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 yronice}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The poet remembers the 'good old days' when 'registers and measures could be trusted,' \softline
i.e., before the civil authorities became corrupt, when they kept proper records and gave proper \softline
amounts of salt (without withholding some for their own profit).  Documentation of these illicit \softline
activities may be found in ample detail in Singleton's commentary to vv. 104-105.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 110.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The ritual occurring here, involving an adaptation of a Beatitude spoken by Jesus, \softline
will recur on the next six terraces as well.  The Sermon on the Mount seems to include eight \softline
beatitudes (Matthew 5:3-10).  For discussion of Dante's use of them, see Federigo Tollemache, \softline
"beatitudini evangeliche" (ED.1970.1). Tollemache points out that St. Thomas, whose discussion \softline
of the Beatitudes (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ST}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.ii.69.3 ad 5) seems to govern Dante's treatment of them, says there are \softline
seven, with 'Blessed are the meek' (Matthew 5:5 [5:4 in the Vulgate]) omitted, while those that \softline
'hunger and thirst after righteousness' are remembered on separate terraces.  Thomas considers \softline
'those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake' to refer to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 all}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the first seven categories.  \softline
Here the reference is to the first: 'Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of \softline
heaven.'  For a discussion of the program of the Beatitudes in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Anna Maria \softline
Chiavacci Leonardi ("Le beatitudini e la struttura poetica del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della \softline
letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  161 [1984], pp. 1-29).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The plural here is taken by the commentators as a singular, a stylistic liberty allowed \softline
for speech (perhaps because the words uttered are more than one).  On all the terraces the fitting \softline
angel speaks his blessing unaccompanied.  (For the program of angelic utterance in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.38-39).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This tercet is an evident return to the thematic opposition of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 musica diaboli}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and \softline
heavenly music (so present in purgatory once the gate is reached and entered in Canto IX).  See 
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.136-139.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is a Christian commonplace, followed by Dante, that Pride is the root sin, \softline
notwithstanding the Pauline claim that 'radix malorum est cupiditas' (avarice is the root of all evil}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  -- }{\plain \fs24 \f1 I Timothy 6:10).  Clearly Dante holds to the former notion, as we are here told that the removal \softline
of the P of Pride erases most of the indented marks made by each of the other six P's.  For the \softline
question as to whether or not Dante uniquely has a P upon his forehead see the notes to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.112 and XXI.22-24.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-136.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Anyone who has played the version of poker known as 'hatband' will \softline
immediately understand this concluding simile, the lighthearted tone of which culminates only \softline
logically in Virgil's smile.  Having subdued his pride (and he knows how afflicted he is by this sin}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  -- }{\plain \fs24 \f1 see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.133-138), the protagonist feels lighter, better, as though his trip through \softline
purgation were half finished already.  And thus this canto ends with a lighter and happier feeling \softline
than any that precedes it, offering a sort of foretaste of Edenic innocence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab What has escaped readers of the simile is, however, exactly what concrete situation the \softline
poet had in mind.  Micaela Janan suggested in 1981, in a graduate seminar on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  at \softline
Princeton, that the scene is modeled upon one in Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Theb}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.760-791).  In the games \softline
(modeled on those in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V) before the battle for Thebes, Alcidamas nicks the forehead of \softline
Capaneus with a blow.  Capaneus hears the onlookers's murmuring, but only realizes, when by \softline
accident he touches his wound, that he is bleeding.  This seems a possible, if not a certain, source.  \softline
On the other hand, Dante's commentators are maddeningly imprecise in their responses to the \softline
passage.  However, Portirelli (comm. to vv. 127-135) does suggest that what is at stake is an \softline
object put on one's head by friends as a joke.  Scartazzini (comm. to verse 128), following Buti \softline
(1385), thinks the object might be a feather.  Porena comm. to vv. 128-129) repeats these two \softline
possible interpretations.  It would seem reasonable to believe that Dante had something specific in \softline
mind (e.g., bird droppings), but we have not succeeded in identifying the image in his thought.\par
}}