{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 07}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'digression' that fills almost exactly half of the last canto now yields to the \softline
continuance of the narrative that had related the embrace between the two Mantuan poets at \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.75.  The formulation 'a third time and a fourth' is, as has often been noted, \softline
Virgilian; since Scartazzini (comm. to verse 2) the reference is noted as being potentially triple: \softline
Virgil, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.94; IV.589; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.410.  And Virgil, having been buffeted so unkindly in \softline
these early cantos of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , is about to have his innings.  Sordello asks about the provenance \softline
of both these travelers; once Virgil identifies himself, the contemporary Mantuan poet completely \softline
loses track of Dante.  But the ancient Mantuan poet does so as well.  In all his discussion with \softline
Sordello (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.67-VIII.45) he never once refers to Dante as the reason for his own journey -- \softline
as we have become accustomed to his doing (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.52-69; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.94-99; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.31-33).  \softline
Sordello obviously realizes that someone is in Virgil's company.  Yet even after Virgil finally \softline
refers to Dante at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.38 (tacitly, when he employs a first-person plural of a verb), \softline
Sordello continues to think of his guidance as being at the service of Virgil alone ('ti' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VII.42, VII.47, and VII.48).  Indeed, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , from Sordello's point of view, is a \softline
poem about Virgil, with Dante's role in it never mentioned (he is joined tacitly to Virgil again in a \softline
first-person plural pronoun at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.62).  It is only because we are so deeply aware of Virgil's \softline
role as Dante's guide that we tend not to notice the total absence of reference to that relationship \softline
here.  (For similar arguments, see Frankel ["La similitudine della zara (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 . VI, 1-12) ed il \softline
rapporto fra Dante e Virgilio nell'Antepurgatorio," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Studi Americani su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 , ed. G. C. Alessio \softline
and R. Hollander (Milan: F. Angeli, 1989)], pp. 135-37.)  It will only be in the next canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VIII.62) that Sordello will understand that Dante is a living man.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reference to the redemption of sinners wrought by the Crucifixion seals Virgil's \softline
sense of his own doom, his bones buried (19 B.C.) during the rule of Augustus (63 B.C.-A.D. \softline
14), whose reign coincided with the birth of Jesus.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the sole occasion on which Virgil names himself in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (his name \softline
occurs thirty-one other times), thus answering in part Sordello's questions at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.70, \softline
concerning the homeland and identity of these two travelers, one of which Virgil had already \softline
answered ('Mantua' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.72).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   To be without faith is to lack what is absolutely necessary in order to 'win' salvation.  \softline
The Anonimo Fiorentino (comm. to vv. 25-27) cites St. Paul: 'without faith it is impossible to be \softline
pleasing to God' (Hebrews 11:6), a passage explaining that Enoch was taken up alive into heaven \softline
because of his faith -- as will be Dante soon, and as Virgil was not.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 9-13.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The simile, another instance of what Tozer calls 'similes drawn from mental \softline
experience' (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.136-141), investigates the enormous pleasure of Sordello at \softline
meeting Virgil, a scene that will be reformulated for the meeting of Statius and Virgil in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.124-136.  Sordello's humility in lowering his brows ('e poi chin{\f3 \'62} le ciglia') is \softline
verbally reminiscent, if antithetically, of Farinata's pride (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.35: 's'ergea col petto e con la \softline
fronte' [was rising, lifting chest and brow] and Satan's effrontery (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.35: 'contra 'l suo \softline
fattore alz{\f3 \'62} le ciglia' [raised his brows against his Creator]).  But it may also remind us of Virgil's 
own lowered brows when he is so filled with shame at his failure to believe in Christ to come \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.44: 'e qui chin{\f3 \'62} la fronte').\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A small squall of disagreement disturbs the sea of commentary on this verse: does \softline
Sordello embrace Virgil just beneath his armpits? at the level of his thighs? at his knees? while \softline
lying prostrate at his feet?  All four of these solutions continue to be put forward into the late \softline
twentieth century, while many commentators have been content to suggest that it is impossible to \softline
know exactly where this embrace is aimed.  Because later Statius will intend to embrace Virgil's \softline
feet (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.130-131) some argue that this is the most likely solution.  But Vandelli (comm. \softline
to vv. 10-15) points out that, while Statius is later presented as prostrating himself, here Sordello \softline
is only described as lowering his brows; he prefers the most popular of the four major hypotheses \softline
(some have also read the line as including reference to the belly-button, but we may let that pass): \softline
Sordello bends his knees slightly so as to embrace Virgil under his arms, where the figure of lesser \softline
authority embraces his superior.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil, apostrophized by Sordello both as foremost among all Latin poets and as \softline
his greatest townsman, is here cast as the founder of all Romance poetry.  The precise meaning of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lingua nostra}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (our language) has been debated (see Mazzoni's summary of the debate [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Divina \softline
Commedia: Purgatorio.  Con I commenti di T.Casini/S.A. Barbi & A. Momigliano}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: \softline
Sansoni, 1977)], p. 164), and includes a wide range of possibilities: all human vernacular; Latin \softline
alone; all poetry, vernacular and Latin; and vernacular that is specifically developed from Latin.  \softline
This last seems the most acceptable reading, making Latin the 'mother tongue' of the Romance \softline
vernacular poets, as would also seem to be the case at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.94-99.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'merit or grace' would seem to refer to Sordello's worthiness to encounter Virgil \softline
coupled with God's generosity in allowing him to do so.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Since Virgil has already (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.8) confessed that he has 'lost heaven,' Sordello \softline
must assume that he is in hell.  For a reading that sees the implicit rebuke to Virgil in Sordello's \softline
reference to his hellish situation see Picone ("All'ombra di Sordello: una lettura di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
VII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rassegna europea di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1998]), pp. 65-66.  The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 chiostra}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is a \softline
'triple hapax,' i.e., one of a family of seventy-eight words in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that occur once in each \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  See Hollander ("An Index of Hapax Legomena in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
106 [1988]), pp. 108-10.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's rejoinder rather surprisingly makes no reference to any reason for his being \softline
chosen for this journey; it is thus not surprising that Sordello believes his task is to guide Virgil, \softline
selected by God, to see these sacred precincts.  Dante has become, temporarily, supernumerary.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.18 Virgil will make clear to Statius that he must return to hell.  \softline
Here it is also clear that he considers Limbo his final resting place, but he says as much in ways \softline
that invite speculation as to his possible salvation, since he claims now to know God and to have \softline
been aided by Him in coming this far.  The absence of reference to Virgil's guidance of Dante \softline
allows Sordello to believe better of his townsman than the facts warrant.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a rich consideration of the eventual implications of Virgil's self-defense here \softline
see the 'Nota di approfondimento' to this canto in the commentary, currently in progress, of \softline
Nicola Fosca.  The Roman poet puts the best possible face upon his presence in Limbo, \softline
attempting to establish a sort of 'innocence by association,' as it were, with the unbaptized infants \softline
and the other virtuous pagans.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   At least since 1340 and Pietro di Dante's commentary it has been usual to cite }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
VI.673, 'nulli certa domus' (no one has a preordained home), as a gloss on this verse.  These are \softline
the words spoken by Musaeus to the Sibyl, who has asked where Anchises dwells, only to be told \softline
that he and the other virtuous souls live, free to roam, in the Elysian fields.  Musaeus, like \softline
Sordello, offers to guide his charges up to see the assembled souls.  This entire scene is closely \softline
modeled on that one.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 44.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Sordello seems to indicate that there is a law in ante-purgatory that prevents \softline
nocturnal movement upward.  But see his further explanation, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.53-60.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again Sordello addresses only Virgil (and not Dante), and indeed, we can \softline
imagine, Virgil will enjoy seeing these Christian souls who are so reminiscent of his virtuous \softline
denizens of the Elysian fields.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil, slow to understand the difference between external laws and inner will on \softline
this mountain, believes either that hellish demons would hinder a nocturnal climber or that such a \softline
climber would, with nightfall, lose his ability to ambulate upward.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Sordello's answer sets things straight: There are no external impediments and the \softline
inner will of the penitents makes them want to stay where they are, lest they wander to a lower \softline
station on the mountain, which would not be fitting.  It seems that there would be no actual \softline
penalty for such behavior, but that no one would ever want to descend in any case.  The 'rule' of \softline
the mountain is more aesthetic than moral, since no harm can befall any of these saved souls.  In \softline
this 'club,' no one would want to behave in so churlish a fashion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Bortolo Martinelli ("Canto VII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Neapolitana: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. \softline
Pompeo Giannantonio [Naples: Loffredo, 1989]), pp. 163-66, referring to the currently traditional \softline
citation of John 8:6-8 (Jesus drawing on the ground with his finger), perhaps first found in \softline
Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 52-54), goes on to interpret this 'line' as the New Law, the grace of \softline
God without which our actions are ineffective, closing his remarks with a further citation of \softline
Jesus's words in John's gospel (John12:35-36), a passage cited previously by Portirelli (comm. to \softline
vv. 53-62) and others: 'Yet a little while is the light with you.  Walk while you have the light, lest \softline
darkness come upon you: for he that walks in darkness knows not where he goes.  While you \softline
have light, believe in the light, that you may be the children of light.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Sordello will lead them among the souls gathered in the place that has come to be \softline
known as the Valley of the Princes, not among the early commentators, but at least by the time of \softline
Andreoli (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.54).  It furnishes a certain foretaste of the garden of Eden, the \softline
pilgrim's eventual purgatorial destination.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Much has been written about these verses.  Beginning with Sapegno (comm. to \softline
verse 73) commentators have suggested a source in a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 plazer}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (a lyric poem describing the beauties \softline
of a place, person, or object) by Guido Cavalcanti, 'Bilt{\f3 \'42} di donna,' verse 8: 'Oro e argento, \softline
azzurro 'n ornamenti.'  (For Dante's earlier citation of this poem see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.30.)  \softline
Dante is thus here understood to be joining the tradition of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 plazer}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (cf. his own early poem, \softline
addressed to Cavalcanti, 'Guido, i' vorrei' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rime}{\plain \fs24 \f1  52]) in describing this particular }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 locus amoenus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
the idealized 'pleasant place' since the Greek idyllic poems of Theocritus in classical antiquity.  On \softline
a closely related theme, see A. Bartlett Giamatti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Earthly Paradise and the Renaissance Epic}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966]).  For consideration of the deep resonance of 'Bilt{\f3 \'42} \softline
di donna' in this passage, see Michelangelo Picone, "All'ombra di Sordello: una lettura di \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rassegna europea di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 (1998), pp. 70-72.  Picone notes \softline
the way in which Dante's description 'outdoes' Guido's by merit of its supernatural Christian \softline
content.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab There is disagreement about the gemmology involved here.  A particularly exercised \softline
debate involves whether }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 indaco}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is a noun meaning 'indigo' (Petrocchi's view, which naturally has \softline
influenced our translation), separated from the second noun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 legno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or an adjective modifying that \softline
noun.  Some of those who defend the second hypothesis translate the resulting phrase as 'Indian \softline
wood,' indicating amber.  Those who believe that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 indaco}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is a free-standing noun supply various \softline
understandings for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 legno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  See Mario Aversano ("Dal modello al testo: 'indico legno, lucido \softline
sereno,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  29 [1987], pp. 3-25) for the view that it is the}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  lignum thyinum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (thyine wood) \softline
of the Bible, particularly in Revelation 18:12, where it is among the goods of the earth that will no \softline
longer be commercially valuable in the time of tribulation.  For discussion of the colors indicated \softline
in this passage see Bortolo Martinelli ("Canto VII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Neapolitana: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
ed. Pompeo Giannantonio [Naples: Loffredo, 1989]), pp. 168-70.  The overall effect of these \softline
colors, their ambience, and the eventually described inhabitants of the valley serve to remind the \softline
reader of Dante's reference to the 'garden of the empire' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.105.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the emerald's association with hope (and its presence in the rest of the poem) see A. \softline
Levavasseur ("Les pierres pr{\f2\u233\'e9}cieuses dans la }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine Com{\f2\u233\'e9}die}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Revue des {\f2\u233\'e9}tudes italiennes }{\plain \fs24 \f1 4 \softline
[1957]), pp. 59-66.  For the medieval lapidaries that Dante might have known see V. Cioffari \softline
("Dante's Use of Lapidaries: A Source Study," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  109 [1991]), pp. 149-62.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The supernatural nature of this place produces colors and odors that transcend, in \softline
their intensity and ability to give sensuous pleasure, their counterparts in the most exotic 'normal' \softline
natural }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 loci}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The souls of the princes of the world invoke the merciful Queen of Heaven, \softline
underscoring their present humility.  This Marian evening hymn includes the fitting verses: 'to you \softline
we send up our sighs, mourning and weeping in this valley of tears.'  (For the full text of the \softline
hymn, see Singleton, comm. to verse 82.)  Poletto (1894) noted the echo here of another part of \softline
the scene presided over by Musaeus in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.656-658: the souls seated in the Elysian fields \softline
who sing songs of praise in that fragrant place.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the association of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Salve, Regina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  with Compline see Denise Heilbronn ("Dante's \softline
Valley of the Princes," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  90 [1972]), p. 50.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 86.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet's diction reminds us of the fact that Virgil, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 the}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Mantuan, has temporarily 
been 'demoted' in favor of Sordello.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 87-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Sordello explains that the combined restraints of the diminishing light of the sun \softline
and of the time that would be lost in social amenity dictate a distant viewing of the inhabitants of \softline
the valley.  Here, too, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VI.754-755) makes its presence felt, as Vellutello (comm. to \softline
vv. 85-90) noted: Anchises stations himself on a higher vantage point (with Aeneas and the Sibyl) \softline
so as to be able to discern the faces of those moving toward him in the pageant of Rome.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-94.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the structural and moral force of Sordello's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 planh}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or poem of lament, for the \softline
death of Blacatz reflected in Dante's composition of the rest of this canto see Picone ("All'ombra \softline
di Sordello: una lettura di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rassegna europea di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1998]), \softline
pp. 73-77.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab There are nine princes in the following 'list,' all of them ticketed for paradise, as there were \softline
nine who were saved at the last moment in Cantos V and VI.  Both these groups of late-repentant \softline
sinners, the first of whom have in common death by violence, are seen as active (as opposed to \softline
the lethargic in Canto IV) in their attachment to the world.  Rudolph of Austria, the only emperor \softline
(1273-91) in this group, father of the Albert so vilified in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.97-102, is, however, \softline
censured most for his neglect of his Italian subjects.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Given the recorded behaviors of Rudolph (and of others in this group) it is surprising that \softline
Dante was willing to publish their salvations -- or the fact that he even thought that they were \softline
saved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 95-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Rudolph, had he served as he ought, might have spared Italy the divisions that \softline
occurred before 1291, culminating in the battle of Campaldino (1289), when Guelph supremacy \softline
solidified papal influence in Italian politics for a long time to come.  The 'wounds that have \softline
brought Italy to death' are most probably the ensuing disasters wrought by Boniface's (and then \softline
Clement's) political activities.  Is Italy no longer capable of resuscitation?  Will another leader's \softline
efforts be too late or might they come in the nick of time?  The text is again problematic (see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.100-102), first as to whether or not Henry VII is referred to, second as to the \softline
precise meaning of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tardi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which can mean, in this context, either 'at the last moment' or 'too late to \softline
succeed.'  If, as many believe, this passage (1) was written in 1308-9 (along with }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.97-102), (2) refers to Henry VII, (3) uses }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tardi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to mean 'at the last moment,' everything falls into \softline
place: Dante, not yet convinced that Henry will be the vigorous Italophile that he becomes in \softline
1310, only dubiously puts forward the notion that Henry's election will have positive result.  One \softline
proposing such an interpretation must admit that Dante, with only minor touches, could have \softline
revised both these passages in order to accommodate his post-1310 view of Henry.  On the other \softline
hand, both at least allow the possibility of a more positive reading, and thus did not absolutely \softline
require such revision.  And Dante's enthusiasm would only last for a short while, in any case.  By \softline
September 1313, in the wake of the death of Henry, the disheartened reading, found in \softline
Benvenuto's commentary to these passages in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI and VII and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.133-138, would have become appropriate.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The following five figures were all kings rather than emperors, beginning with \softline
Ottokar of Bohemia (1253-78), who was in fact killed by Rudolph in 1278.  Just as Rudolph, for \softline
all his faults, is presented as saved, while his son Albert seems clearly not to be, so is Ottokar 
exalted while his son, Wenceslaus, is apparently headed for the second circle of hell (or lower).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Singleton (comm., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ad loc}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .) points out that in the Elysian fields former enemies are also \softline
reunited in peace (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.824-827).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Philip III (the Bold) of France (1270-85) is seen in colloquy with Henry I of \softline
Navarre (1270-74), to whom he was related by marriage (his son, Philip IV [the Fair], 'the plague \softline
of France,' was married to Henry's daughter Juana).  While Philip IV is also clearly referred to \softline
several other times in the poem, generally with bitter sarcasm (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.87; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.91; \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.152-160; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.45; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.120), he is never named.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Christopher Kleinhenz ("A Nose for Art [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII]: Notes on Dante's \softline
Iconographical Sense," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  52 [1975]) argues that the physical descriptions of the princes in \softline
the valley parallel and may reflect the 'advent of realism and naturalism in Italian art, especially \softline
recognizable in donor portraits' (p. 376).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Large-limbed (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 membruto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) like Cassius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.67), Pedro III, king of \softline
Aragon (1276-85), sings along with large-nosed Charles I of Anjou and Provence, king of Naples \softline
and Sicily (1266-85).  Pedro had married Constance, daughter of Manfred (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.115-116), in 1262, a relationship that gave him a claim to the crown of Sicily, which he assumed after \softline
the Sicilian Vespers (1282) and held until his death, despite the efforts of Charles, whom he had \softline
deposed and who died before Pedro, and thus without regaining his crown, in 1285.  Once again \softline
we see enemies united in friendship.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante refers, among Pedro's four sons, either to the firstborn, Alfonso III of \softline
Aragon, who reigned for six years (but not with happy result, according to the chroniclers) after \softline
his father's death (1285-91) and died at twenty-seven, or the last, Pedro, who did indeed die in his \softline
boyhood and was never put on.  However, the text would seem clearly to indicate a son who did \softline
not succeed his father on the throne.  Torraca (comm. to vv. 115-120) makes a strong case for the \softline
unlikelihood of Dante's celebrating Alfonso, thus promoting the candidacy of Pedro (the \softline
'Marcellus' of Aragon, as it were).  He has been followed by most commentators.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Unlike their worthy brother (Pedro?), the other two sons of Pedro III, James \softline
and Frederick, do not possess their father's goodness, but only his territories.  In fact, they went \softline
to war with one another over their claims to power in Sicily, with Frederick eventually winning \softline
out, leaving James to content himself with Aragon.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's sententious moralizing, issuing from the mouth of Sordello, has a \softline
precursor in his earlier words on the same subject in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.xx.5 and IV.xx.7), as \softline
Poletto (comm. to this passage) was perhaps first to point out.  There Dante testified both that \softline
nobility does not descend into an entire family, but into individuals, and that it comes only and \softline
directly from God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Charles and Pedro, themselves noble of spirit, share the disgrace of degenerate \softline
offspring, the former's son, Charles II, king of Naples and count of Provence (1289-1309), singled \softline
out as being particularly vile.  See Grandgent's explanation (comm. to verse 127) of these lines: \softline
'Charles II is as much inferior to Charles I as Charles I is to Peter [i.e., Pedro] III.  Beatrice of 
Provence and Margaret of Burgundy were the successive wives of Charles I, Constance (daughter \softline
of Manfred) was the wife of Peter; and Charles I was not a devoted husband.  "The plant (the son) \softline
is inferior to the seed (the father) to the same extent that Constance boasts of her husband (Peter) \softline
more than Beatrice and Margaret boast of theirs (Charles)."'  Dante, who has somewhat \softline
surprisingly treated Charles of Anjou with a certain dignity (see the harsh characterizations of him \softline
at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.67-69 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.127), now takes some of that away, as Pedro and Charles are \softline
no longer treated with equal respect.  Porena (comm. to vv. 127-129) explains that Dante's \softline
gesture here is meant to show his objectivity; having saved Manfred (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III), he now also saves \softline
Manfred's persecutor, Charles, despite his own political (and moral) disapproval.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Henry III of England (1216-72), disparaged by Sordello in his lament for \softline
Blacatz (as noted by Poletto [comm. to these lines]), is here seen positively and, reversing the \softline
trend found in the last three 'couples' of monarchs, his son (Edward I), known as 'the English \softline
Justinian' for his compilation of English law, is seen as even more noble than he.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-136.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The final exemplar is, like Henry, seen alone, looking up in prayer \softline
(Bosco/Reggio (comm. to these verses).  Marquis of Monferrato (1254-92), Guglielmo first \softline
welcomed Charles of Anjou when he descended into Italy, but then turned against him when he \softline
moved against Lombardy.  Guglielmo's physical position is lowest in order to match his rank, as \softline
Rudolph, the only emperor in the group, was seated highest.  His successful career as Ghibelline \softline
military leader in Lombardy and in Piedmont came to a dramatic halt when he was captured in \softline
Alessandria in 1290 and exhibited in a cage for a year and a half until he died.  When his son, \softline
Giovanni, set out on a war of revenge, the result was disastrous for Monferrato and Canavese, the \softline
two regions that constituted the holdings of the marquisate.\par
}}