{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 20}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The metaphoric sponge (his knowledge of this pope's experience) will not be as \softline
thoroughly saturated as the protagonist would have liked because he wishes no longer to distract \softline
Adrian, acceding instead to his clear desire to return to his penance.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil and Dante move along close to the wall of the mountain, away from the shades \softline
of the penitents, so thickly strewn upon this terrace but mainly near the outer edge.  That avarice \softline
has affected an enormous number of souls was also clear from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.25.  And while Pride is \softline
often accounted the 'root sin,' another tradition gives Avarice that role.  See Trucchi (comm. to \softline
this passage) and Giacalone (comm. to vv. 7-9), the latter citing the passage in I Timothy 6:10 \softline
('Radix omnium malorum est cupiditas' [avarice is the root of all evil]) that helped form that \softline
tradition.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil addresses Plutus, standing over the avaricious in the fourth Circle of hell, as \softline
'maladetto lupo' (accurs{\f3 \'50}d wolf -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.8); the she-wolf (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lupa}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) who blocks Dante's upward \softline
path in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.49-54 is widely understood to represent the sin of avarice.  Here there can be no \softline
doubt: the poet apostrophizes that sin as being the most widespread among mortals.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-14.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet's second apostrophe seeks aid from above in the hope of defeating the \softline
scourge of avarice.  Mattalia (comm. to these verses) sees these astral influences as executors of \softline
the will of God.  Kennerly M. Woody ("Dante and the Doctrine of the Great Conjunctions," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  95 [1977]), p. 122, puts a finer point upon this view, arguing that Dante is here \softline
referring to the conjunction of the planets Saturn and Jupiter every twenty years.  One such had \softline
occurred in Dante's birth year, 1265, in the constellation of Gemini (and thus in the period of \softline
Dante's birth); the next was scheduled for 1325, also in Gemini.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Even from the very beginning of the exegetical tradition, commentators, e.g., the \softline
Anonymous Lombard (comm. to this verse) and Jacopo della Lana (comm. to vv. 13-15), believe \softline
that this opaque question refers to the}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  veltro}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (hound) in Virgil's prophecy at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.101, thus \softline
from this vantage point lending that passage a decidedly imperial caste.  It is striking to find so \softline
much unanimity here, and so little there.  However, if there the political figure was (as some \softline
believe) Cangrande della Scala, here it would seem to be an actual emperor, Henry VII, not \softline
merely a supporter of the Ghibelline position.  Dante would have felt that Henry's advent was still \softline
in the offing, as it was until the autumn of 1310, when the emperor announced his decision to \softline
come to Italy; or else, if the passage was written in the spring of 1311, the poet, as in the view of \softline
Trucchi (comm. to vv. 13-15), was urging Henry to do what he had up to now failed to do, \softline
despite his presence in Italy: capture the city of Florence.  In his seventh Epistle, Dante's initial \softline
enthusiasm for the imperial enterprise has been reduced to overexcited and dubious hope.  See the \softline
notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.97-102 and VII.95-96.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab These two apostrophes in the mouth of the poet (vv. 10-12 and 13-15) are suggestively \softline
coupled; the first deprecates avarice while the second calls for divine intervention in the form of \softline
an imperial presence.  We have just met a pope, who conquered the avarice that threatened to ruin \softline
him, but who, despite his best intentions, left the papacy vulnerable to the depredations of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lupa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of avarice; we are about to meet a just king (in Dante's mind not in fact a king, but the father 
of a line of kings), whose France, in his wake, will do everything it can to collaborate with the \softline
corrupt papacy in its struggle against the forces of imperial righteousness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The exemplars on this terrace are presented in an artistic medium that is \softline
parsimonious when compared to those we have been treated to on the first three terraces (see \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.99-138): here, a (temporarily) anonymous voice crying out the name and a \softline
single action of those who were noteworthy for their generosity of spirit.  As usual, the first is \softline
Mary, here remembered for giving birth to the Son of God in a stable (Luke 2:7).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Caius Fabricius, famous Roman hero, Consul B.C. 282, 278, Censor 275.  During \softline
the invasion of Italy by Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, he was sent to the latter to negotiate an exchange \softline
of prisoners.  Pyrrhus used every effort to gain him over, but Fabricius refused all his offers.  On a \softline
later occasion he sent back to Pyrrhus the traitor who had offered to poison him, after which he \softline
succeeded in arranging terms for the evacuation of Italy by the former.  He and his contemporary \softline
Curius Dentatus are lauded by Roman writers for their frugality, and probity in refusing the bribes \softline
of the enemy' (Toynbee, "Fabbrizio" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  The protagonist's special \softline
pleasure in hearing of him reflects some of the poet's nearly constant enthusiasm for models of \softline
Roman republican virtue.  (For the extraordinary importance of Roman republicanism to Dante \softline
see Davis [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Italy and Other Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, \softline
1984)], pp. 224-89; and see Hollander and Rossi ["Dante's Republican Treasury," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
104 (1986)], p. 75, for Fabricius's presence in four of the five collections of republican heroes \softline
offered by Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Nicholas, whose gift-giving eventually made him the patron of Christmas, was a \softline
bishop in Asia Minor in the reign of Constantine in the fourth century.  His renown for generosity \softline
is based upon his kindness in offering dowries of gold for the three daughters of an impoverished \softline
noble friend, who had been planning to sell them into prostitution in order to maintain them and \softline
himself.  In the first two examples, poverty was itself seen as a sort of nobility, preferred both by \softline
Mary and by Fabricius to worldly wealth.  Here things are a bit different, as Nicholas allows his \softline
friend to escape from poverty by arranging for his daughters' dowries.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's two questions ('who were you? why do you alone cry out?') are \softline
accompanied by a promise to repay the favor of replies by procuring prayers for this penitent on \softline
earth.  These three elements will structure the rest of the canto, given over almost entirely to the \softline
words of this as yet unnamed speaker.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The protagonist's last phrase, concerning the brevity of human life, is memorably echoed \softline
near the conclusion of this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.54: ''l viver ch'{\f3 \'50} un correre a la morte' [the life \softline
that is a race to death]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Hugh Capet (we can infer that this is he from the next tercet, while he will offer a \softline
clear statement of his identity at verse 49) answers with the style of a man practiced in the ways of \softline
the political world.  As a gentleman, he will respond to Dante only out of the goodness of his \softline
heart because he can see that Dante lives in grace; at the same time, like the pope who spoke \softline
before him (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.142-145), this father of a line of kings realizes there are few or none \softline
below who honor his memory.  As he converses with Dante, we can observe that half of him lives 
in this new world of grace while half of him remembers the world he left behind.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As the ancestor of a line of kings of France, Hugh had a crucial role in ruling the \softline
land that now casts its desiccating shadow over the 'garden of the empire' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.105).  We \softline
can imagine that to Dante, exiled as a result of French intervention in the affairs of Florence in \softline
collaboration with Boniface VIII in 1302, these words have a particularly bitter ring.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the series of events in Flanders that culminated in the uprising of the Flemish \softline
cities in 1302 see Singleton's commentary (to verse 46).  While the French did manage to hold on \softline
to some of the territory of Flanders, their military defeat at Courtrai in July 1302 must have \softline
seemed to Dante in some respects a punishment for what was done to Florence in the same year.  \softline
Hugh's words ring out as a prophetic hope to see his descendants justly punished, but have a \softline
particular resonance for an Italian auditor.  See Tullio Santelli ("Il canto XX del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,"  \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  17 [2001]), pp. 21-23, for the political atmosphere of the Italy in which Dante was \softline
composing this very political canto, which Chiavacci Leonardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio, con il commento di A. \softline
M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: Mondadori, 1994]), p. 579, refers to as 'the last "political" canto of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' (although }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII surely also has some claim to be so considered).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The speaker at last fully identifies himself as Hugh Capet, who was in fact king of \softline
France (987-996), even if Dante did not know him as such.  'The statements put by Dante into the \softline
mouth of Hugh Capet as to the origin of the Capetian dynasty are in several respects at variance \softline
with the historical facts, and can only be explained on the supposition that Dante has confused \softline
Hugh Capet with his father, Hugh the Great,...  The facts are as follows: Hugh the Great died in \softline
956; Louis V, the last of the Carlovingians, died in 987, in which year Hugh Capet became king; \softline
on his death in 996, he was succeeded by his son Robert, who had previously been crowned in \softline
988 [to assure a Capetian continuity upon Hugh's eventual death].  Dante makes Hugh Capet say: \softline
firstly, that he was the son of a butcher of Paris (verse 52), whereas common tradition assigned \softline
this origin not to Hugh Capet, but to his father, Hugh the Great; second, that when the \softline
Carlovingians came to an end he was so powerful that he was able to make his son king (vv. 53-60), whereas on the failure of the Carlovingian line Hugh Capet himself became king (987); and \softline
third, that with his son the Capetian line began (vv. 59-60), whereas in fact it began with himself' \softline
(Toynbee, "Ciapetta, Ugo" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  Hugh's control of the power over \softline
kingship is the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alpha}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of which the rule of Philip the Fair, the French king as Dante was writing, is \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 omega}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For a treatment of the historical details see Rajna ("'Ugo Ciappetta' nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina \softline
Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , canto XX]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  37 [1960 (1924)], pp. 5-20).  On the \softline
particulars of Hugh's speech see also Riccardo Scrivano ("L'orazione politica di Ugo Capeto," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1971], pp. 13-34).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 50-51. }{\plain \fs24 \f1  Bosco/Reggio (comm. to verse 50) offer a list of the ten kings who followed Hugh \softline
to the throne between 996 and 1314.  Four of these indeed bore the name 'Philip' and four, 'Louis,' \softline
but it is the last in each of these groups who may be of greatest interest.  Louis IX (1226-1270) is \softline
one of the major figures of the Middle Ages, a great crusader, king, and saint.  Of him Dante is -- \softline
perhaps not surprisingly, given his hatred of France -- resolutely silent; of Philip IV (the Fair -- \softline
1285-1314), he is loquacity itself, vituperating him several times in this canto, but also in a \softline
number of other passages (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.85-87; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.109-110; XXXII.155-156; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .XIX.118-120).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For Dante's repetition of this common error concerning Hugh's paternity see \softline
Toynbee's remarks in the note to verse 49.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 53-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Again Dante is misled, perhaps confusing events in the eighth century surrounding \softline
the last days of the Merovingian line, when Pippin the Short }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 did}{\plain \fs24 \f1  put away his last possible \softline
political rival in a monastery.  What Hugh had done was to have the last of the Carolingians, the \softline
Duke of Lorraine, imprisoned in 991.  He remained in prison until his death a year later.  See \softline
Bosco/Reggio's comment on verse 54.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Hugh's account of himself as kingmaker is, once again, not in accord with history \softline
(see Toynbee, above in the note to verse 49): it was immediately after he himself was made king \softline
that he had his son, Robert, anointed as his successor.  Thus his account of himself as father of the \softline
first of the line is an unwitting act of modesty, since he himself was the first in it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Hugh offers a brief and allusive recapitulation of four centuries of French \softline
expansionism, beginning with the continuing efforts to annex Provence, which avoided this fate \softline
until 1246, when a marriage between the brother of Louis IX, Charles of Anjou, was arranged \softline
with Beatrice, daughter of Raymond Berenger IV of Provence.  And then, to make amends for \softline
this perfidy (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 per ammenda}{\plain \fs24 \f1  will be repeated, with increasing sarcasm, to create a triple identical \softline
rhyme, twice in the following tercet), France consolidated its territories by annexing three other \softline
territories that had been independent.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   And now the really dreadful deeds begin: a descent into the Italian peninsula where \softline
a series of members of the French royal house named Charles are given employment by being sent \softline
into Italy: Charles of Anjou, who is blamed for killing Conradin (the last hope of Italian \softline
Ghibellinism) at Tagliacozzo in 1268 (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII.17-18) and for poisoning Thomas Aquinas \softline
in 1274 (a rumor that appears to have been made out of whole cloth as part of Italian anti-French \softline
propaganda, but which Dante seems only too willing to propagate).  Then Charles de Valois will \softline
take (we are once again in the realm of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 post-factum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  prophecy) Florence in 1301 on behalf of an \softline
alliance among the French, the papacy of Boniface, and the Black Guelphs of Corso Donati; it is \softline
not difficult to imagine Dante's outrage at the intervention of this second Charles.  Finally, the \softline
third of these wretched Frenchmen, Charles II, son of Charles of Anjou and king of Naples, is \softline
brought on stage to suffer Dante's taunts, delivered by this French version of Dante's ancestor \softline
Cacciaguida (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV-XVII), a benevolent ancestor of (in this case) an undeserving \softline
descendant.  This Charles is portrayed as, after having lost a calamitous naval battle during the \softline
Sicilian Vespers in 1284 and, as a result, being held prisoner on his own ship, selling his daughter \softline
(there having been no intervention from St. Nicholas on his behalf, we may assume) into \softline
matrimony with Azzo VIII of Este in 1305.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Hugh's first apostrophe of Avarice parallels Dante's at vv. 10-12.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   And now the worst of all the French arrives for his excoriation, King Philip IV \softline
(see note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.103-111 and to vv. 50-51, above).  This king, who had been 
excommunicated by Boniface as a result of their dispute over the French king's desire to tax the \softline
clergy, had his revenge when, in September 1303, the king's representative, William of Nogaret, \softline
accompanied by an Italian ally, Sciarra Colonna, a member of the family that Boniface, aided by \softline
the advice of Guido da Montefeltro, had harmed (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.102), arrived in Anagni with a \softline
force of soldiers and, after physically assaulting the elderly pope, imprisoned him in his own \softline
palace, which they sacked.  Boniface was eventually freed in a popular uprising against these \softline
intruders and made his way to Rome.  But the insult to his person, both physical and spiritual, was \softline
apparently so great that he died on 12 October 1303.  For a description in English of the outrage \softline
done to Boniface see Carroll's commentary (comm. to vv. 85-96).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante was no admirer of Boniface.  The French attack upon the person of the pope, \softline
however, was an attack upon the holy office itself, and thus upon the Mystical Body of Christ, the \softline
Church.  And thus Boniface is compared to Christ betrayed by Pontius Pilate and crucified, while \softline
the agents of Philip become the two thieves present at that event, but now represented as part of \softline
the torture administered to their victim.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the possible dependence of Dante's verses here on a poetic prayer to the Virgin \softline
composed by Boniface see Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Second Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1899)], pp. 396-97); for the text of this poem see Robert Artinian \softline
("Dante's Parody of Boniface VIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  85 [1967], pp. 71-74).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'new Pilate' now directs his rage against the Templars.  (For a more balanced \softline
view than Dante's of Philip's motives see Scott [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Political Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Philadelphia: \softline
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996)], pp. 174-77.)  'The Knights Templars were one of the \softline
three great military orders founded in Cent. xii for the defence of the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem.  \softline
After having existed as a powerful and wealthy order for nearly two centuries they were in 1307 \softline
accused by Philip the Fair of heresy, sacrilege, and other hideous offences, in consequence of \softline
which he ordered their arrest, and by means of diabolical tortures wrung from them confessions \softline
(for the most part undoubtedly false) of their alleged enormities.  Five years later, at Philip's \softline
instigation, they were condemned by Clement V, and the order was suppressed by decree of the \softline
Council of Vienne (May, 1312); in the following year the Grand Master, Du Molay, was burned \softline
alive at Paris in the presence of the king.  The French king's motive in aiming at the destruction of \softline
the Templars was, it can hardly be doubted, a desire to get possession of the immense wealth of \softline
the order, as is implied by Dante, and stated in so many words by Villani (viii.92)' (Toynbee, \softline
"Templari" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  When did Dante write this passage?  Clearly sometime \softline
after 1307; and, perhaps nearly as clearly, before 1312.  It is notable that none of the details of the \softline
denouement of this ugly scheme reached Dante's page: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sanza decreto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (unsanctioned) the king sets \softline
out without the papal support necessary to justify such an action (it would come from that other \softline
detested Frenchman, Pope Clement V, only in 1312).  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Hugh's second apostrophe parallels Dante's (vv. 13-15) in hoping for divine \softline
vengeance to descend from above and smite the guilty, in this case most particularly Philip the \softline
Fair.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab There are questions as to whether the poet meant the reader to think of the 'vengeance' as \softline
reflecting his defeats in Flanders in 1302 (see Singleton [comm. to verse 96]), or Philip's death \softline
while hunting, when his horse was overturned by a charging boar, in 1314 (the opinion of John of \softline
Serravalle [comm. to these verses]), or neither of these events.  As Trucchi (comm. to these 
verses) points out, Dante clearly refers with joy to Philip's death in November 1314 at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XIX.118-120.  The notion that God's vengeance for the events at Anagni in 1303 occurred in \softline
Flanders in 1302 hardly seems acceptable.  Further, as Bosco/Reggio (comm. to these verses) \softline
argue, since Dante does refer to Philip's death in the next }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , it only makes sense to believe \softline
that he did not yet know of it when he wrote this passage, for it would have been much too \softline
tempting a piece of information not to include.  In any case, the result is as Dante probably would \softline
have wanted anyway; here he predicts only that such outrageous behavior will receive God's \softline
eventual vengeance -- it is but a matter of time.  This seems the best understanding.  The gleeful \softline
passage in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  banks the promissory note that Dante writes us here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Scartazzini (comm. to verse 95) was perhaps the first to cite, as a source for the oblique \softline
phrasing of this tercet, which causes some readers difficulty, Psalm 57:11 (58:10): 'Laetabitur \softline
iustus cum viderit vindictam' (The just man shall rejoice when he witnesses his revenge).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab At verse 35, Dante had inquired as to the speaker's identity; it has taken Hugh sixty-two \softline
lines to answer him by including the history of France's decline as a narrative of a family's woe, \softline
from his virtue to Philip's savagery, in just over three hundred years.  Needless to say, for Dante, \softline
Hugh's tale is still more important as the record of what went wrong for Italy, drawing her from \softline
her Roman-imperial destiny toward her near death (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.94-96), because of France's \softline
malfeasance.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   To answer Dante's second question, caused by his sense that only one penitent \softline
seemed to be crying out the names of the generous, Hugh is equally contorted and long-winded, \softline
only clearing up Dante's miscomprehension at vv. 118-123.  When he uttered the name of Mary \softline
(verse 19) he did what he and his companions do during the day, i.e., name the exemplars of \softline
generous lives; at night they turn from names that serve as 'goads' to those that serve as 'bridles,' \softline
those of the avaricious.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For Mary as 'bride of the Holy Spirit,' Singleton (comm. to vv. 97-98) cites Matthew 1:20: \softline
'For that which is begotten of her is of the Holy Spirit.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is Dante's most 'crowded' group of exemplary figures in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , eight \softline
of them presented in fifteen lines.  Once again he divides his cast into biblical and pagan \softline
personages, here not in parallel pairings (as in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.25-60) but chiastically:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab Pygmalion (Virgil)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab Midas (Ovid)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab Achan (OT)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab Ananias (NT)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab Saffira (NT)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab Heliodorus (OT)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab Polymnestor (Virgil, Ovid)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab Crassus (Cicero? )\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's tale of Pygmalion's avarice (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.340-364) is narrated by Venus to \softline
Aeneas.  Pygmalion was king of Tyre and brother of Dido, married to wealthy Sychaeus.  \softline
Pygmalion secretly murdered Sychaeus, whose shade then appeared to reveal everything in a \softline
dream to Dido, who consequently made off, with Sychaeus's hidden stores of wealth, to her new 
life in Carthage, thus depriving Pygmalion of the gold he sought.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Two back-to-back Ovidian narratives involving Midas (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.100-193) \softline
may here be condensed into a tercet.  In the first Bacchus allows Midas his famous 'touch,' turning \softline
all to gold with disastrous results once he realizes he can no longer eat nor drink, and has to ask \softline
to have his gift withdrawn; in the second Apollo metamorphoses Midas's ears into the enormous \softline
ears of an ass because Midas, alone among the listeners, insisted on his opinion that Pan's piping \softline
was more beautiful than Apollo's playing of his lyre.  Dante refers to this scene in his second \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Egl}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.50-53).  It is not clear whether Midas is laughable only for his foolish avarice or \softline
for his ass's ears as well.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Achan's theft of the treasure of the Israelites and its result (his being stoned to \softline
death by command of Joshua) is the subject of the entire seventh chapter of Joshua (7:1-26).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ananias and his wife, Sapphira, having sold some of their land to make a donation in \softline
support of the young Church, kept back part of the price for themselves.  Peter, reading their \softline
hearts, tells first Ananias and then his wife that he realizes they have lied; as a result, each drops \softline
dead before him from shame (Acts 5:1-11).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 113.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Heliodorus was sent by his king, Seleucus IV of Syria, whom he served as treasurer, \softline
to take possession of the treasure in the temple in Jerusalem.  Entering the sacred precinct for \softline
such purpose, he is assaulted by a terrifying figure on horseback and by two young men who beat \softline
him (II Maccabees 3:7-40).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 114-115.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Polymnestor murdered Polydorus for the gold of Troy that the young son of \softline
Priam was sent with, while supposedly under the protection of the Thracian king (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XIII.31-39 and note; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.18-19).  Dante's sources include Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.22-48) and Ovid \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.429-438).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 116-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Marcus Licinius Crassus, known as 'Dives' (the rich man), the name reflecting \softline
his reputation for avarice.  He had a successful political career, becoming triumvir with Caesar \softline
and Pompey in 60 B.C. (all three were reconfirmed in 56).  In 55 he became proconsul in Syria.  \softline
Trapped in an ambush by the warring Parthians, he was killed, and his severed head and one hand \softline
were sent back to the Parthian king, Orodes, who then had his mouth filled with molten gold.  \softline
There is unresolved discussion of Dante's likely source for this tale, with candidates being Paulus \softline
Orosius, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Historiae adversus paganos}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; Lucius Annaeus Florus, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epitome de Tito Livio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; Cicero, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De \softline
officiis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  The Latin phrasing most cited is 'aurum sitisti, aurum bibe' (you thirsted for gold, now \softline
drink it) used to refer to the Parthian king's treatment of Crassus's head.  A number of early \softline
commentators cite these words without ascribing them to any source, e.g., Jacopo della Lana \softline
(comm. to these verses) the Codice Cassinese (to verse 116), and Benvenuto da Imola (to these \softline
verses).  However, beginning with Sapegno (1955) several more recent glossators do claim a \softline
dependence on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De officiis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.30.  For the importance of Florus as source for much of Dante's \softline
Roman history, see Antonio Martina, "Floro" (ED.1970.2), pp. 948-52.  For Dante's earlier \softline
readings in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De officiis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Simone Marchesi ("La rilettura del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De Officiis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  e i due tempi della \softline
composizione del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  178 [2001], pp. 84-107).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Hugh finally explains the reasons for his seeming to have spoken alone when \softline
Dante first observed him.  What can we deduce from the fact that he, of all the penitents, is the \softline
most moved to call upon the positive examples of generosity?  Perhaps we are meant to \softline
understand that he, burdened by his thoughts of the terrible avarice of his French descendants, is \softline
the one most moved at this particular moment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Porena (comm. to vv. 121-122) disputes Rajna's notion ("'Ugo Ciappetta' nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina \softline
Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , canto XX]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  37 [1960 (1924)], pp. 5-20) that, on the \softline
basis of a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 chanson de geste}{\plain \fs24 \f1  concerning Hugh in which he is portrayed as dissipated, he is \softline
presented by Dante as repining his prodigality rather than his avarice.  Hardly anyone today \softline
accepts this theory, since until Canto XXII there will be no mention of prodigality on this terrace.  \softline
Further, it would not be in the spirit of this fraternal place for Hugh to inveigh against those who \softline
had committed sins so different from his own.   Benvenuto (general note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX) is of the \softline
opinion that this canto deals with avarice, the next one with prodigality.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In contrast to his unenthusiastic departure from Pope Adrian, Dante's leaving of \softline
Hugh Capet is quick and purposive.  Perhaps the difference in the two interviews is that this one \softline
has come to a sense of completion, while Dante still longed to know more of Adrian's life at the \softline
end of his discourse.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sudden shift in focus to Dante's fearful condition in response to this \softline
earthquake opens an entirely new chapter in the narrative, a unique one.  As Philip B. Miller \softline
observed in conversation many years ago, Statius's completion of penance is the only genuine \softline
event that occurs involving a damned or a saved soul in the entire }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  (Discussion of \softline
Statius awaits the next canto.)  All else in the poem that passes for narrative action pertains to \softline
demons or angels interacting with Dante, Virgil, or the souls whom they help to punish to serve, \softline
to Dante's own difficulties or successes in moving on, or else represents some form of ritual \softline
performance by the souls in the afterworld for the benefit of onlooking Dante.  Dante, still a \softline
stranger on this magic mountain, responds by feeling like a man in fear of death.  We shortly learn \softline
that he is witness to a moment of completion, of resurrection.  It takes a while for this to become \softline
clear.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Benvenuto (comm. to these verses) understands the simile as having the \softline
following meaning: 'Just as that most renowned island, Delos, once sent forth the two most \softline
famous luminaries into the sky [Apollo and Diana, the sun and the moon], so now this most \softline
renowned mount of purgatory was sending into the heavens two very famous poets, one ancient, \softline
i.e., Statius, and one modern, i.e., Dante.  I speak not of Virgil, for he did not go to heaven.'  The \softline
commentary tradition is, nonetheless, a seedbed of confusion for interpreters of these verses.  The \softline
following things are among those variously said: (1) Delos was made stable by Jove so that \softline
Latona, pursued by jealous Juno, could give birth in peace; (2) before Latona gave birth, Delos \softline
suffered no such quaking; (3) the island became stable only when Latona arrived to give birth on \softline
it; (4) Apollo later made the wandering island stable out of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pietas}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the version sponsored by \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.73-77).  Either the third or this last, partly because of its Virgilian authority, seems the \softline
best to follow.  The mountain's wild quaking reminds the poet of the agitated condition of the \softline
floating island, which welcomed Latona for her parturition, before it was made fast, either by her \softline
arrival or, later, by Apollo.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab For passages in the Old Testament anticipating Dante's supernatural earthquake see \softline
Patrick Boyde (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Philomythes and Philosopher: Man in the Cosmos}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Cambridge \softline
University Press, 1981]), pp. 93-95.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again a tercet is devoted to Dante's apparent fear and now to Virgil's \softline
miscomprehension of what is happening, since he, too, thinks that fearful thoughts now are \softline
understandable, if not welcome.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The passage in Luke 2:13-14 presenting angelic praise of God at the birth of \softline
Jesus ('Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among men of good will') is cited first by \softline
Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to these verses).  By comparing himself and Virgil to the \softline
shepherds that first heard the angelic }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Gloria}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Luke 3:15), Dante has underlined the connection \softline
between Jesus and Statius, which will be evident in the next canto as well.  The birth of Jesus \softline
stands as a sign for the rebirth of this soul, who has finished his purgation and is prepared to \softline
ascend to the Father.  All on the mountain apparently cease their own penitential activity to \softline
celebrate the event in this song, and do so until the quaking stops; we are led to imagine that this \softline
is true each time a soul arrives at this joyful moment of freedom from even the memory of sin, a \softline
condition that is formally completed with the passage through the waters of Lethe in the earthly \softline
paradise.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Scott (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Political Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, \softline
1996]), pp. 174-75, citing the previous remark in P{\f2\u233\'e9}zard's commentary (Dante Alighieri, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Oeuvres \softline
compl{\f3 \'50}tes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Paris: Gallimard, 1965]), p. 1266, rightly points out that the earthquake at Statius's \softline
'resurrection' remembers that which occurred at the crucifixion of Jesus, so that Christ's conquest \softline
of death is now literally played out before our eyes in a single modern Christian life.  See also \softline
Gmelin (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Kommentar: der L{\f2\u228\'e4}uterungsberg}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Stuttgart: Klett, 1955]), p. 328; Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory \softline
in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), pp. 67-68; and a later \softline
version of Scott's remarks ("Dante's miraculous mountainquake," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Electronic Bulletin of the Dante \softline
Society of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [October 1996]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142-144.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   At the cessation of the celebrative singing all return to their usual practice, \softline
including the two travelers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 145-151.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante for the first time underlines his unusual (even for him) curiosity to know \softline
the meaning of the things he has just felt and heard.  Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 145-147) noted \softline
the echo here of Wisdom 14:22, 'in magno viventes inscientiae bello' (they live in a great war of \softline
ignorance).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The need to press on leaves Dante suspended -- and the reader, as well.\par
}}