{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 08}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This pseudosimile (it has the effect but not the grammatical form of a simile) sets the \softline
protagonist apart from more usual mortal travelers.  Using the two great metaphors for this \softline
journey and this poem, the voyage across a sea and the pilgrimage, the poet presents his \softline
earthbound counterparts as filled with all-too-human backward-looking sentiment.  The \softline
protagonist pays attention to the event taking place before him, avoiding nostalgia, the sort of \softline
distraction we found him so attracted by in the second canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  when he encountered \softline
Casella and experienced associated memories of his former life.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Grabher's gloss to verse 5 runs as follows: 'This is the bell for Compline, the last of the \softline
canonical hours of the day, when indeed the hymn }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Te lucis ante terminum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Before the ending of \softline
the light] is sung in order to invoke divine assistance against the temptations of the night.'  This \softline
hymn immediately follows the lesson in the service occurring after Vespers (the time between 3pm \softline
and 6pm), ideally accompanying the setting sun.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 4-6) was perhaps the first to note the closeness to Dante's \softline
description of the pilgrims whom he observed in Florence, perhaps rapt in thoughts of the friends \softline
they had left behind at home (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XL.2).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Byron's close translation of these much-admired verses in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Don Juan}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.108 is noted by \softline
Carroll (comm. to vv. 1-6).  For a reading of this canto in the spirit of these lines see Enrico "La \softline
nostalgia che 'volge il disio': Lettura del canto VIII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rivista di Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 1 \softline
[2001], pp. 91-119).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The opening passage is so beautiful and its readers so moved by it that most of them \softline
assume that the protagonist is being associated by the poet with the travelers it refers to.  Yet it is \softline
clear that, unlike those travelers, he does not yield to the temptation of yearning for a past that is \softline
out of reach, even though this is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  first evening in a distant, foreign place.  Indeed, he may be \softline
drawing some of his attention from the hymn }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Salve, Regina }{\plain \fs24 \f1 in order to pay heed to the soul who \softline
calls for attention.  Who this soul may be is a matter for which there are no grounds for discovery; \softline
we cannot even say whether it is male or female, although the entirely male cast of those identified \softline
in the Valley of the Princes makes the former possibility a more likely one.  Commentators, \softline
including Scartazzini (comm. to verse 9), have been reminded of Acts 13:16: 'Paul arose, \softline
motioning with his hand for silence' (Paul is addressing the Jews in the synagogue at Antioch; his \softline
main message is the Resurrection of Jesus).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Some commentators believe that Dante is 'tuning out' Sordello, but this seems unlikely for \softline
two reasons: (1) Sordello's speech, ending the previous canto, has a finished feel to it; (2) we \softline
know that almost all the penitents in the valley are singing the hymn }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Salve, Regina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.82), \softline
and surely seem to be continuing to do so, as Sordello's words indicate (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.93; VII.113; \softline
VII.125); we are not told they have ceased to sing it until they join this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantor}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Te lucis ante \softline
terminum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.13-18).  It thus seems likely that Dante is taking his attention from their \softline
song in order to attend to this fairly urgent signal, which in turn quiets them.  As Scartazzini \softline
(comm. to verse 7) argues, 'The Poet did not wish to say, 'I began to be aware that silence had \softline
fallen' [as Scartazzini berates many commentators for saying], for when one is hearing nothing it is \softline
not necessary to cut short one's listening.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The praying figure is facing east, not because the sun is there (it is setting in the 
west), but because the east is traditionally associated with Christ as 'rising sun.'  For the Virgilian \softline
provenance of his gesture see Tommaseo (comm. to these verses): Dante's 'lev{\f3 \'62} ambo le palme' is \softline
indeed close to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.844-845: 'et ambas / ad caelum tendit palmas.'  However, Heilbronn \softline
("Dante's Valley of the Princes," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  90 [1972]), pp. 56-57, points out that his action \softline
'imitates the words of Psalm 133:3: 'In noctibus extollite manus vestras in sancta, et benedicite \softline
dominum' [134:1-2: by night... lift up your hands in the sanctuary and bless the Lord].  At \softline
Compline, this psalm immediately precedes the hymn, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Te lucis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as the gesture does in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Te lucis ante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , an evening hymn, is sung in its entirety.  As Singleton points out, in his \softline
remarks about this verse, the context of what is sung is closely pertinent to the scene played out \softline
here in the valley; he also offers both the Latin and the English texts of the hymn.  As opposed to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Salve, Regina}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which looks back upon the sadness of sin and exile, hoping for Marian \softline
intercession, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Te lucis ante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  looks ahead and requests the Father's and the Son's protection from the \softline
dangers of the Satanic forces of the night.  Thus, while surely there is nothing 'wrong' with singing \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Salve, Regina}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , in this context it is time to turn to the future, and this is what the protagonist does.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 14-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's reaction to this singing is reminiscent of his rapt response to the singing \softline
performed on his account by Casella in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II (Poletto comm. to vv. 10-15) also notes \softline
this).  The religious tone of this hymn and the 'proper' behavior of this crowd gives us a very \softline
different perspective on this scene.  There is no need of a Cato to come to reprimand these \softline
singers, whose eyes are fixed on heavenly things.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the first of seven addresses to the reader in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VIII.94-96).  Most reminiscent, in its use of the language of allegory, of 'veiled' truth, found in the \softline
second address (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.61-63), this passage also involves treating an action performed in the \softline
poem as though it were not 'historical' but metaphoric (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1  .IX.58-63).  In the first \softline
case that such was the case was suggested by Virgil's covering Dante's hands with his own, a \softline
physical gesture laden with allegorical significance, while now the text will refer to a battle that \softline
does not in fact take place (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.103-108), but which needs to be understood for its \softline
significance.  In each case we are dealing with what would seem to be related, in Dante's mind, \softline
with the 'allegory of the poets,' i.e., a text that can be understood metaphorically, even though it is \softline
presented as 'historical.'  See Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1969]), pp. 239-49.  For the view that the 'veil' that needs to be pierced covers \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 preceding}{\plain \fs24 \f1  verses, the hymn }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Te lucis ante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , offered as prayer by the penitents, see Natascia \softline
Tonelli, "Intorno agli angeli di Dante.  I. Nella Valletta dei Principi," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L{\u8219\'27}Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  20 (2002), p. 96.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Most of the early commentators, following their natural inclination, allegorize the \softline
meaning of the two swords (often as God's justice and mercy), but Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, \softline
comm. to vv. 25-27) turns to the Bible for their source, and presents a more interesting analysis.  \softline
Yet it will only be with Lombardi (comm. to vv. 26-27) that a later commentator turns to this \softline
most likely source.  Genesis 3:24 records God's placing (two?) Cherubim at the east of the garden \softline
of Eden along with a flaming sword to keep sinful humans from the tree of life.  Dante's redoing \softline
of the scene is careful and meaningful.  The swords have no points because they do not need to do \softline
any harm, since the enemy has been defeated by Christ and need no longer be feared by those \softline
having faith in Christ; they are aflame with God's love for humanity, which has reversed the 
exclusionary rule of law in Genesis and reopened the garden with its tree of eternal life; the angels \softline
are green of wing and vestment because they give expression to the hope for salvation brought by \softline
Christ.  Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert ("Canto VIII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges \softline
G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), p. 109, notes the pivotal reversals of \softline
the scene in Genesis here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As Singleton suggests in his comment to this line, the image brings to mind an army \softline
camped for the night and guarded by sentinels (the host was indeed first [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.22] referred \softline
to as an }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 essercito}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , literally an 'army,' but the term generally had a wider sense in Dante's day).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Genesis (3:14-15) is another text visible behind the scenes of this drama (as \softline
Christopher McElroy, Princeton '72, suggested in a classroom many years ago), God's curse upon \softline
the serpent and the conjoined prophecy of the the woman's seed who will bruise the serpent's head \softline
and have his heel bruised as a result, taken by Christian exegetes -- and surely by Dante among \softline
them -- to refer to the Crucifixion.  Both these Cherubs come from the bosom of Mary, that 'anti-Eve,' to guard the valley, now safe from harm, as we shall see, against the serpent.  This garden, \softline
foreshadowing the garden of Eden that lies above, has been reopened to humanity, as has been \softline
that higher place.  Paradise has been regained.  See Amilcare Iannucci ("The Nino Visconti \softline
Episode in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII [vv. 43-84]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Fusta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3, no. 2 [1978]), p. 1: 'We have an audience \softline
watching a kind of mystery play which contains both paradise lost and paradise regained.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the palindromatic opposition Ave/Eva see Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXXII.4-6 [the locus of most commentators' discussion of this topos]): 'And the holy men say \softline
that, just as sickness was born from that most prideful one, that is, Eve, just so its cure springs \softline
from that most humble one, that is, Mary.'  And thus, Pietro continues, the 'Ave' of the 'Hail, \softline
Mary' counters the effect of Eve, whose name it spells backward.  Commenting on this canto, J. \softline
S. Carroll (comm. to vv. 22-30) ties in that subject to this scene: 'this contrast between Mary and \softline
Eve is a favourite subject with early and mediaeval theologians, in sign of which Eva is reversed \softline
and becomes the Ave of the Angel's salutation, as in the Ave, Maris Stella hymn: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sumens illud \softline
Ave}{\plain \fs24 \f1  / }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Gabrielis ore,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  / }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Funda nos in pace}{\plain \fs24 \f1  / }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Mutans Evae nomen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' (Taking that 'Ave' from the \softline
mouth of Gabriel, put us at peace, changing the name of Eve).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   On the basis of Sordello's description, the serpent sounds both real and threatening \softline
enough for Dante to be afraid, especially since he has not yet read the signs as well as he will \softline
eventually.  There is only one other occasion in the poem in which Dante has been }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gelato}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(chilled): when he looks upon Satan (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.22).  This serpent is indeed Satan in his 'serpent \softline
suit' in the garden (Genesis 3:1 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 passim}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Sordello's maneuver puts the appointment with the serpent on hold and occupies \softline
Dante's mind with other things.  Now the Mantuan poet has Dante descend among the inhabitants \softline
of the valley -- what he and Virgil specifically did not do in their first view of them (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.88-90).  The rest of the Edenic drama must wait until }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.94-108.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These three steps, unlike those at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.70, are taken by almost all \softline
commentators at face value.  But even they, understood by most as indicating that it was but a \softline
short distance down into the valley (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.72), have made allegorists stir with interpretive 
excitement, e.g., Vellutello (comm. to vv. 46-54); Scartazzini (comm. to this verse).  Poletto \softline
(comm. to vv. 46-48) waxes hot against such attempts.  However, Trucchi (comm. to vv. 46-48) \softline
yields to temptation with a totally unconvincing sally: the three steps reflect the three orders of \softline
rulers Dante has observed in the preceding canto, an emperor, kings, great vassals.  Mattalia \softline
(comm. to this verse) struggles for a moment before succumbing: the colors of the angels are \softline
three, as are the poets gathered here, and as will be the stars that Dante will see.  And Chimenz \softline
(comm. to vv. 46-48) is of the opinion that the three steps }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 must}{\plain \fs24 \f1  be allegories, but of what he \softline
cannot even begin to say.  And even Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 46-48) remark that an \softline
allegorical reading is possible, if impossible to be certain of, but insist that three is such an \softline
important symbolic number that some sort of allegory must be latent in it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Like the anonymous lethargic penitent at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.9, this penitent has eyes for \softline
Dante alone.  On this occasion, however, it tells us more about him than it does about Dante.  See \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.109-111.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   From the distance, this soul and Dante could not recognize one another, but the \softline
darkness of nightfall is not yet so great as to prevent their doing so now.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This 'recognition scene' reestablishes Dante's role as 'star' of the poem.  Virgil has his \softline
Sordello, for whom Dante does not exist; Dante has his Nino, for whom Virgil does not exist.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 53.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Nino Visconti of Pisa, judge of the district of Gallura in Sardinia; he was grandson of \softline
Count Ugolino della Gherardesca, and in 1288 was chief of the Guelf party in Pisa; in that year he \softline
and the Guelfs were treacherously expelled from Pisa by Count Ugolino, whereupon he retired to \softline
Lucca, and in alliance with Genoa and the Lucchese and Florentine Guelfs made war upon Pisa, \softline
which he carried on at intervals for the next five years.  In 1293, on the conclusion of peace \softline
between the Pisans and the Tuscan Guelfs, Nino betook himself to Genoa, and shortly after \softline
departed to his judgeship of Gallura....  Nino died in Sardinia in 1296' (Toynbee, "Nino2" \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  Nino fought at the battle of Campaldino and probably spent some \softline
time in Florence in the time between his exile from Pisa and his removal to Sardinia; it is possible \softline
that Dante came to know him then, as the conversation is clearly meant to be taken as one \softline
between old friends.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's surprise at Nino's salvation is not necessarily based on any specific knowledge \softline
of any particular sin; all are sinners and, if honest, are surprised to find themselves saved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The meeting between Dante and Nino contrasts with that between Virgil and \softline
Sordello, this one untinged by tragic notes.  Nino assumes, almost correctly, that Dante is one of \softline
the saved; Sordello, guided by Virgil's admission that he has lost heaven, asks about Virgil's \softline
location in hell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.21).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Chiavacci Leonardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: Mondadori, \softline
1994]), p. 241, cites Francesco D'Ovidio for the view that the phrase in verse 57, 'over far waters,' \softline
reflects, once again, a scene in the Elysian fields, when Anchises welcomes Aeneas (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.692), \softline
who had journeyed 'over wide seas' to experience that reunion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante finally is able to answer Sordello's question (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.70) with regard to his \softline
own condition.  These are the first words he has spoken since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.51, a fact that \softline
underlines the way in which Sordello and Virgil have taken over the stage in these scenes.  Now \softline
Dante is once again the 'star' of the drama.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.1-3.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Sordello and Nino are both surprised to learn that Dante is here in the flesh, is not \softline
yet dead, the one turning to his new companion, Virgil the Mantuan, the other, Nino, to his friend \softline
in God's grace, Currado, perhaps known to him from his recent travels in Tuscany.  It is likely that \softline
Dante considered both Virgil and Sordello, champions of empire, sympathetic to the Ghibelline \softline
cause, while Nino was a Guelph and Currado, though a Ghibelline, was a cousin of Moroello \softline
Malaspina, with whom Dante had good relations and who was a Guelph.  In the next world such \softline
divisive distinctions begin to break down.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Currado Malaspina was the grandson of Currado 'l'antico' and son of Federigo of \softline
Villafranca.  He died ca. 1294.  His first cousin, Franceschino, was probably Dante's host in \softline
Lunigiana in 1306 (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.133-139).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Nino comments upon the unknown and unknowable purpose of God in bringing \softline
this living human soul into the immortal realm.  He is content to accept the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 quia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the sheer fact of \softline
Dante's having been chosen to be here.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.37.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 71-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Nino hopes that Dante, returning to the world, will see his daughter, Giovanna, in \softline
Pisa and cause her, by recounting this meeting, to pray for his soul.  Giovanna's innocence is the \softline
result at least of her age, since she was born in 1291 or so.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Nino's unnamed wife was Beatrice d'Este.  Sometime after his death in 1296 she \softline
stopped wearing widow's vestments, which featured white bands drawn around the head (her \softline
'wimple'), and eventually married, after a previous betrothal, a second husband, Galeazzo Visconti \softline
of Milan, in June of 1300.  The misery that awaits her is to share the exile of her new husband \softline
because of the expulsion of the powerful Visconti family from Milan in 1302.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 77.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For early awareness of the citation of Virgil here, see the Anonimo Fiorentino (comm. \softline
to vv. 76-78), who brings to bear }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.569-570: 'A woman is ever a fickle and a changeful \softline
thing.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Nino's heraldic language suggests that the device of the Milanese Visconti's coat \softline
of arms, the viper, will not decorate her tomb as well as would have his family's device, the \softline
rooster, had she remained a widow and eventually died in Pisa.  According to Amilcare Iannucci \softline
("The Nino Visconti Episode in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII [vv. 43-84]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Fusta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3, no. 2 [1978]), pp. 4-6, \softline
Nino's family drama is resolved in biblical terms, with his wife, Beatrice, associated with the \softline
serpent of Genesis, and his daughter, Giovanna, with Mary.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Whether with a purpose or not, Dante plays off the situation that pertained in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .XXIV3, when Guido Cavalcanti's Giovanna preceded Dante's Beatrice as John the Baptist \softline
preceded Christ.  Here the innocent Giovanna is a foil to the unnamed but vicious Beatrice d'Este, \softline
her own mother.  In the language of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 King Lear}{\plain \fs24 \f1  turned inside out, 'bad wombs have borne good \softline
daughters.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet underlines the fact, lest we fail to observe it, that Nino takes no pleasure \softline
in his former wife's coming tribulations, but merely notes God's justice in them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These three tercets distance the reader from the intense family drama narrated by \softline
Nino, as though to put that drama into a cosmic context.  The protagonist gazes at the pole in the \softline
southern sky where, as on a wheel, that which is closest to the axle moves more slowly than \softline
points farther from it.  The four stars, representing the four cardinal virtues (as almost all agree), \softline
seen by the travelers in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.23 near the pole, are now setting on the other side of the \softline
mount of purgatory and are thus shielded from view.  They are replaced in their former position \softline
by these three.  Nearly all, primarily because of their allegorical reading of the four, also insist that \softline
these represent the three theological virtues, faith, hope, and charity.  However, some \softline
commentators, following Portirelli (comm. to vv. 86-93), argue for a strictly literal and \softline
astronomical reference here, the three stars being among the brightest of two southern \softline
constellations, Dorado and Achernar in Eridanus; Canopus in Carina.  (For Portirelli's notion that \softline
Dante knew about the southern heavens from Marco Polo, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.22-24.)  Later \softline
commentators, following Paget Toynbee (see "Alfergano" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]), think \softline
that Dante had his information from the texts of Alfraganus.  Toynbee is responsible for \softline
demonstrating Dante's reliance on Alfraganus's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Elementa astronomica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , based heavily on Ptolemy's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Almagest}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , written in Arabic in the ninth century and then translated into Latin in the twelfth \softline
century by Gerard of Cremona and in the thirteenth by John of Seville.  Dante cites this text twice \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , once by Alfraganus' name (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.xiii.11), once by the title '}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Libro de \softline
l'Aggregazioni de le Stelle}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.v.16) but, as Toynbee has shown, probably resorts to it on at \softline
least seventeen other occasions in his works (mainly in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Beginning with Andreoli \softline
(comm. to verse 89), for half a century most commentators argue for a literal sense that indicates \softline
phenomena in the southern sky }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 and}{\plain \fs24 \f1  an allegorical sense.  But after Poletto (comm. to vv. 91-93) \softline
most indicate only the allegorical meaning.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Sordello interrupts Virgil's heavenly discourse to call his (and, once again, not \softline
Dante's) attention to the drama unfolding in the garden.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We have seen this 'snake' before, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIV, imprisoned for his arrogant \softline
assault on God.  Now we see him replaying his role in the Fall, licking himself in prideful self-absorption as he plans another assault, now that he has lost his first battle, upon humankind.  Both \softline
Sordello's urgency in interrupting Virgil's notice of the heavens' beauties and the fact that no \softline
opposition has as yet deployed its forces have the effect of creating uncertainty (and fear) in the \softline
na{\f3 \'56}ve onlooker and in the reader.  This serpent seems dangerous indeed, as he was when he \softline
tempted Eve in Eden, but in fact is not, as we presently discover.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's attention to the snake kept the rapid defensive action of the angels from \softline
his view until they suddenly enter his field of vision, immediately thwarting the plans of the snake.  \softline
We now see why their swords are blunted: they have no need of them because this serpent is \softline
powerless to offend.  This drama is precisely that, a play, by which the onlookers, now safe in \softline
their potentially (but definitively) saved state, may be reminded of their sinful lives -- their \softline
vulnerability to the serpent -- and the grace that has rewarded their goodness with salvation.  \softline
Mark Musa (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Advent at the Gates}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1974]) examines 
this scene as a representation of Christ's recurring second advent, as set forth by St. Bernard in his \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 First Sermon on the Advents}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Between His first (when He came to earth to save humankind) and \softline
final coming (at the end of time, to judge and rule the world), Christ is understood as coming into \softline
the heart of each successive believer.  For Denise Heilbronn ("Dante's Valley of the Princes," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  90 [1972]), who accepts (p. 46) Musa's view, the intervention of the angels \softline
represents 'an allegorical enactment of the intermediate Advent -- that is, the coming of Christ into \softline
the hearts of the faithful in this world.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 astor}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is a bird of prey, domesticated in order to hunt other birds, but also particularly \softline
aggressive against snakes: this is the composite gloss that rises from many commentators, if \softline
generally without the presentation of further evidence.  Torraca (1905) cites Brunetto Latini \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tresor}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , I.v.148) for the first traits but not the last.  Beginning with the Ottimo (comm. to these \softline
verses) commentators have reported this species of bird (Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 astur}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , i.e., from Asturia [Fallani, \softline
comm. to vv. 103-105]) to be 'unfriendly to snakes,' whether because they believe this to be true \softline
or because the context would encourage such an explanation and it is found in preceding \softline
commentaries.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Heilbronn ("Dante's Valley of the Princes," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  90 (1972]), p. 55, \softline
argues that it is to Nino's companion's credit (we will shortly discover that this is Currado \softline
Malaspina) that he never takes his eyes from Dante, whose presence marks the really important \softline
event taking place here, against the backdrop of this now familiar play, in which nothing is really \softline
happening, for all its symbolic significance.  The play reflects the past, Dante's physical presence \softline
in purgatory in the present, and the future -- Dante's among Currado's family in Lunigiana and \softline
Currado's hopes for prayer from them, never expressed, but clear from all the similar requests we \softline
have already heard from others.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is strange, in light of other images in the poem that make Virgil a light for \softline
Dante (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.43: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lucerna}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.29: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 luce}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.82, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.11, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.68: \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lume}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) that so few commentators have thought that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lucerna}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here even might refer to Virgil (only \softline
Benvenuto [comm. to vv. 112-117] and John of Serravalle [comm. to vv. 112-117]).  From the \softline
first, glossators have insisted that Dante's guiding light is divine grace, a view made more specific \softline
by Vellutello (comm. to these verses) and most commentators after him: illuminating grace, which \softline
will light Dante's way toward the earthly paradise (and thence true heaven) if only his good will \softline
(his 'wax') will feed its flame.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The valley of the river Magra, flowing through Lunigiana, home of the \softline
Malaspina family.  For Currado and his grandfather see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.61-66.  \softline
Currado's disclaimer is probably meant to be taken as a sign of his modesty (his grandfather was \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 real}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Currado), as is his awareness that his love of the world must be purged above on the \softline
mountain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's words in praise of the valor and generosity of the house of Malaspina in \softline
1300 are in fact words of thanks for the hospitality of Franceschino Malaspina in Lunigiana in \softline
1306 (and, according to Boccaccio, in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita di Dante }{\plain \fs24 \f1 [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Trattatello in laude di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. G. \softline
Ricci (Milan: Mondadori, 1974)], p. 483, of Moroello Malaspina as well [see Dante's letter to \softline
Moroello, his fourth Epistle, ca. 1307]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This verse has been variously interpreted.  If we agree that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 capo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is the subject \softline
(and not the object) of the sentence, as almost all do, then we may choose among the following \softline
solutions: the wicked chief who corrupts the world may be Satan, the pope (and then surely \softline
Boniface VIII), Rome (with its corrupt papacy and no emperor in her saddle), or bad governance \softline
in general.  Whichever solution Dante may himself have had in mind, it is clear that any and all of \softline
these solutions 'work,' and are, in fact, interrelated.  If Satan is the 'prince of darkness' who leads \softline
most humans astray, his minions on earth (corrupt popes, pusillanimous emperors), or even \softline
corrupt leadership generally understood, all point to a common failing and a common cause: weak \softline
humans falling under the influence of those who govern poorly.  From this failing only the \softline
Malaspina family is.currently exempt.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Guglielmo Gorni ("Il canto VIII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  19 [2002]), p. 67, suggests a \softline
venturesome possible reading, in which the 'capo' (head) is to be separated from its accompanying \softline
adjective (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [wicked]), which Gorni would like to treat as a part of the object of the verb, taking \softline
'the world's head' as a metaphor.  The world, then, would be turning its head toward evil.  The \softline
grammar of the clause would not seem to allow this reading.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-139.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Va' or, literally, 'Go' seems here to have the same sense that it sometimes has in \softline
Shakespeare, i.e., 'Go to,' meaning 'Enough of such words.'  Currado, embarrassed by Dante's \softline
praise of his family, goes on to promise his interlocutor that he indeed will have cause to praise it \softline
more in 1306 (i.e., before the sun returns to the constellation Aries seven years from now).\par
}}