{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 24}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The conversation between Forese and Dante continues.  We have not heard Virgil's \softline
voice since the fifteenth verse of the last canto.  We will not hear it again until the next canto \softline
(XXV.17).  This is his longest silence since he entered the poem in its first canto (see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.37-41).  He would seem to have been moved aside in response to Dante's interest in the \softline
encounter with Forese and concern with exploring the nature of his own most particular poetic \softline
practice, the subject at the core of this canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the phrase 'things dead twice over' see the Epistle of Jude.  The context is worth \softline
noting.  Jude is declaiming against those who have infiltrated the ranks of the true believers, those \softline
'ungodly men' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 homines... impii}{\plain \fs24 \f1  -- Jude 4) who are compared to, in succession, the unbelieving \softline
Israelites, the fallen angels, the sinners of Sodom and Gomorrah, as well as those great sinners \softline
Cain, Balaam (Numbers 22-25 and 31:16), and Korah (Numbers 16).  The presence of these \softline
ungodly ones is then portrayed (Jude 12) as a blemish upon the feasts of Christians gathered in \softline
charity.  Interlopers, they are described as 'feeding themselves without fear: clouds they are \softline
without water, carried about by the winds; trees whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bis \softline
mortuae}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), plucked out by the roots.'  Several commentators refer to this passage, but only Poletto \softline
(comm. to vv. 4-6) does so with some attention to the context, also graciously giving credit to the \softline
commentary of Antonio Cesari (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Bellezze della "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Verona: P. Libanti, 1824-26]) for the earliest citation.  The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 contrapasso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here is thus more related to gluttony than at first \softline
may seem apparent, calling attention to an arid feasting that has no regard for the condition of the \softline
soul.  These penitents thus purge themselves as though in memory of Jude's gluttonous 'ungodly \softline
men.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.103-114) we see that Statius is portrayed as \softline
putting off his Christian zeal in order to give himself to affectionate admiration of Virgil.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante asks after Forese's sister, Piccarda, whom we shall meet as the first presence of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.46-49).  The Donati family, like others in the poem, is variously \softline
dispersed in the afterworld.  Later in this canto (verse 84) we will hear of Forese's brother, Corso, \softline
who is destined for hell.  In ante-purgatory we met a member of another similarly dispersed \softline
family, Buonconte da Montefeltro (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.88), son of the damned Guido (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.67).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Forese's touching words of praise for his sister, already joyous in the presence of \softline
God in the Empyrean (the Christian version of Mt. Olympus, home of the gods in classical \softline
mythology) brought the following misogynist comment from Benvenuto (comm. to these verses): \softline
'And that is great praise, for it is a rare thing to find in the same woman harmony between comely \softline
form and chaste behavior.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Piccarda, who was dragged from her life as a nun into matrimony against her will, \softline
eventually puts us in mind of Pia de' Tolomei (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.133-136), who also was forced into a \softline
marriage she did not welcome.  And both of them may send our thoughts back to Francesca da \softline
Rimini, similarly mistreated (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.100-107).  The first three women present in each of the three \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  have this experience in common.  The damned Francesca insists on the impending \softline
damnation of her husband, Gianciotto (but see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.107), while Forese, on the way 
to salvation, speaks glowingly of his already saved sister.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Here' surely refers to this terrace (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.49-51).  Since there \softline
is no prohibition of naming names on any other terrace, commentators worry about Forese's \softline
motive in speaking this way.  Most currently agree that he is using exaggerated understatement \softline
(the trope }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 litotes}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) to make his point: i.e., on this terrace one }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 must}{\plain \fs24 \f1  use names to identify the \softline
penitents because they are unrecognizable (as was Forese to Dante at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII.43-48) as a \softline
result of their emaciation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-20.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bonagiunta Orbicciani degli Overardi da Lucca (1220?-1297?), notary and writer \softline
of lyric poems, composed mainly in imitation of the Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al poets.  He was involved in polemic \softline
against the poetry of Guido Guinizzelli and was attacked by Dante in his treatise on vernacular \softline
eloquence (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dve}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.xiii.1) for writing in a dialectical rather than the lofty ('curial') vernacular.  Some \softline
three dozen of his poems survive and a group of these have been re-edited and re-presented by \softline
Gianfranco Contini (editor, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Poeti del Duecento}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 2 vols. [Milan-Naples: Ricciardi, 1960], vol. I, \softline
pp. 257-82).  See Claudio Giunta (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La poesia italiana nell'et{\f3 \'42} di Dante: la linea Bonagiunta-Guinizzelli}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bologna: Il Mulino, 1998]) and Carlo Paolazzi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La maniera mutata: Il "dolce stil \softline
novo" tra Scrittura e "Ars poetica"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita e Pensiero}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Pubblicazioni dell'Universit{\f3 \'42} \softline
Cattolica, 1998]) for the poetic relationship between Bonagiunta and Guinizzelli and its \softline
significance for Dante.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 21-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Simon de Brie, who 'married' Holy Church as Pope Martin IV (1281-85), was \softline
French.  He was not born in Tours, but had served as treasurer of the cathedral of St. Martin in \softline
Tours.  He briefly served as chancellor of France before becoming a cardinal in 1261.  And his \softline
French connection was further apparent when Charles of Anjou was instrumental in securing the \softline
papacy for him.  His gluttonous affection for eels from Lake Bolsena caused him, according to \softline
Jacopo della Lana (comm. to vv. 19-24), to have them, still alive, drowned in white wine from \softline
Liguria (the town of Vernazza) and then roasted.  The commentator also reports that, as pope, \softline
coming from meetings dealing with Church business he would cry out, 'O Lord God, how many \softline
ills must we bear for Your holy Church!  Let us have a drink!' and head for table to console \softline
himself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Not only did this gluttonous pope support French political designs in Italy, he was the man \softline
who promoted Benedetto Caetani to the rank of cardinal, thus greatly facilitating his eventual \softline
elevation as Pope Boniface VIII (a promotion that Dante could not have regarded with \softline
equanimity, given his personal sufferings at the hands of this pope [see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.52-53]).  In the light of such things, why did Dante decide that Martin was among the saved?  \softline
Trucchi (comm. to vv. 19-24) suggests that, as the successor to the nepotistic and venal Nicholas \softline
III (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.69-72), Martin put an end, for a time, to the practice of simony in the papacy.  It \softline
is for that reason, in his opinion, that Dante overlooked his other flagrant sins to save him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 26-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The act of naming being particularly necessary on this terrace (see the note to vv. \softline
16-18), it brings pleasure (Dante again employs }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 litotes}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : it does not cause scowls) to those who are \softline
named and thus may hope for relieving prayer from the world, once Dante returns to it.  It hardly \softline
needs to be pointed out that many of the sinners in hell were less pleased at being recognized.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 29.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Ubaldino degli Ubaldini of La Pila (castle in the Mugello, or upper valley of the \softline
Sieve, tributary of the Arno, north of Florence), member of the powerful Ghibelline family of that \softline
name.  Ubaldino, who was one of those who voted for the destruction of Florence (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.92), \softline
and was a member of the Consiglio Generale, after the battle of Montaperti (Sept. 4, 1260), was \softline
brother of the famous Cardinal Ottaviano degli Ubaldini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.120), uncle of Ugolino d'Azzo \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.105), and father of the Archbishop Ruggieri of Pisa (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.14); he died in \softline
1291' (Toynbee, "Pila, Ubaldin dalla" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 29-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bonifazio has been 'identified by modern commentators with Bonifazio dei Fieschi \softline
of 1Genoa, Archbishop of Ravenna, 1274-1295....  The ancient pastoral staff of the Archbishops \softline
of Ravenna, which is still preserved, bears at the top an ornament shaped like a chess "rook" \softline
[rather than the conventional curved crosier], hence the term }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rocco}{\plain \fs24 \f1  used by Dante.  Bonifazio... is \softline
known to have been immensely wealthy, but there is no record of his having been addicted to \softline
gluttony' (Toynbee, "Bonifazio[2]" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab While some debate whether or not the reference to the archbishop's pastoral care is meant \softline
to be taken ironically, it seems difficult, in light of the descriptions of the other penitent gluttons, \softline
to take it any other way.  The flock he is envisioned as leading would seem to be less the faithful \softline
of Ravenna than his guests to dinner.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Marchese (or Marchesino) degli Orgogliosi of Forl{\f3 \'58}... was Podest{\f3 \'42} of Faenza in \softline
1296' (Toynbee, "Marchese[4]" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  Embellishing an incident he \softline
probably first heard from his teacher, Benvenuto da Imola, John of Serravalle (comm. to these \softline
verses) recounts it this way: 'One day [Marchese] asked of his servant, "What do the people say of \softline
me?  What is my reputation among them?"  And the servant answered, "O my lord, they say that \softline
you are noble and wise," etc.  And so he spoke again to his servant, saying, "Now tell me the \softline
truth, what do they really say?"  In reply the servant said, "Since you wish it, I will tell you the \softline
truth; people say you are a great drinker of wine."  At which [Marchese] responded, "These \softline
people speak truthfully; but they really ought to add that I am always thirsty -- and that is a fact, \softline
for I thirst continually."'  Bonagiunta was also a lover of the grape, according to Benvenuto \softline
(comm. to vv. 34-39), who characterised him as 'a deft contriver of rhymes and a ready imbiber of \softline
wines.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's attention was drawn to Bonagiunta da Lucca because, he says, Bonagiunta \softline
seemed to know him.  We may reflect that Dante the poet's interest in Bonagiunta centered in his \softline
desire to stage, clued by the utterance of this lesser poet, his own }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ars poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as we shall shortly \softline
understand.  Including Dante, the interaction among those speaking or being noticed in this canto \softline
involves two poets, two religious figures, and two politicians.  And then there are the two \softline
classical poets who are not even mentioned once in this very 'modern' canto (it is notable that \softline
Pope Martin, dead only fifteen years, is the senior ghost among the five gluttons is this group).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For Dante's use of the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mormorare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (murmur), see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
X.100-102.  This passage has long been problematic.  Does Bonagiunta refer to his fellow \softline
Lucchesi in an unfavorable way, calling them }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gentucca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gentuccia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (a deprecating way of \softline
referring to his people, or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gente}{\plain \fs24 \f1 )?  Or is he mentioning a kindly woman of that name who will be \softline
welcoming to Dante when, in his exile, he will come to Lucca?  In this case he would be referring 
to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 femmina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  referred to in vv. 43-45.  Beginning with Francesco da Buti (comm. to vv. 28-39), \softline
who states that Gentucca was the name of a woman from Rossimpelo, most commentators \softline
believe that the reference is to someone who was benevolent to Dante in Lucca during a stay \softline
there.  We have, however, no confirming evidence for this sojourn in Lucca (see Michele Messina, \softline
"Lucca" [ED.1971.3]), which, if it took place, probably did so in 1308-9, and certainly no hard \softline
facts establishing her identity.  Nonetheless, this remains the best hypothesis.  Still others have \softline
attempted to make a case for Gentucca as a woman with whom Dante had some sort of sexual \softline
liaison, an interpretation that seems venturesome at best.  On the entire question see Giorgio \softline
Varanini, "Gentucca" (ED.1971.3).  For more recent consideration of the question, see Cono \softline
Mangieri ("Gentucca dantesca e dintorni," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italian Quarterly}{\plain \fs24 \f1  125-126 [1995], pp. 5-25), arguing, \softline
in a bold hypothesis, that Gentucca was an illegitimate daughter of the poet.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante encourages Bonagiunta, for whom speech is made difficult by the pain he \softline
feels in his mouth, the orifice by which he offended in gluttony, to speak more plainly.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   If this woman is, as some contemporary students of the question suggest, \softline
Gentucca di Ciucchino Morla, she was the wife of Buonaccorso Fondora.  In that case she wore \softline
the black wimple, worn by wives, not the white, reserved for widows.  Nino Visconti's widow, \softline
Giovanna, according to him, made the mistake of remarrying badly, putting off the white wimple \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.74).  However, we cannot be sure whether Bonagiunta is referring to an as yet \softline
unmarried woman, or to a married one whose husband, soon to die, is still alive.  In any case, this \softline
woman will make Lucca seem pleasant to Dante, no matter how others may blame it (as Dante \softline
himself had done in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.40-42).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having recognized Dante earlier (vv. 35-36), Bonagiunta now presses him about \softline
the nature of his poetry.  Is he the poet who drew forth from within himself the new poems that \softline
began with the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  'Ladies that have intelligence of love'?  This is the first long poem of the \softline
three that help to give structure to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , announcing the beginning of its second stage, \softline
in which Dante chooses to give over the style of 'complaint,' borrowed from Cavalcanti, in order \softline
to turn to the style of praise, with its debt to Guinizzelli.  Dante composed this poem around \softline
1289.  From this remark, we learn at least one important thing.  Whatever the determining \softline
features of Dante's new poetry, it was different -- at least according to him, using Bonagiunta as \softline
his mouthpiece -- from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 all}{\plain \fs24 \f1  poetry written before it, including Dante's own.  This precision evades \softline
many who discuss the problem, who continue to allow poems by Dante and other poets written \softline
before }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Donne ch'avete}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to share its status.  It seems clear that Dante's absolute and precise \softline
purpose is to rewrite the history of Italian lyric, including that of his own poems, so that it fits his \softline
current program.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   There is perhaps no more debated tercet in this poem than this one, and perhaps \softline
none that has more far-reaching implications for our general understanding of Dante's stance as a \softline
poet.  Does he refer to Amore as the god of Love? or as the name of the true God in His Third \softline
Person, the Holy Spirit?  Dantists are deeply (and fiercely) divided by this issue.  The bibliography \softline
of work devoted to it is immense.  Readers with Italian will want to refer to three papers that \softline
were composed for the Third International Dante Seminar (Florence, 2000) by members of the \softline
panel concerning the currently vexed question of Dante's attitude toward Cavalcanti and its 
relationship to his view of his own poetic as this is given voice here (see three contributions to the \softline
volume }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: da Firenze all'aldil{\f3 \'42}.  Atti del terzo Seminario dantesco internazionale}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. \softline
Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]: Roberto Antonelli, "Cavalcanti e Dante: al di qua \softline
del Paradiso," pp. 289-302; Robert Durling, "'Mio figlio ov'{\f3 \'50}?' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X, 60]," pp. 303-29; and \softline
Lino Leonardi, "Cavalcanti, Dante e il nuovo stile," pp. 331-54).  For the views of this writer, \softline
which are at some variance especially from those of the first and third of these, see Hollander \softline
("Dante and Cino da Pistoia," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  110 [1992], pp. 201-31, and "Dante's 'dolce stil \softline
novo' and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: mito e poesia. Atti del secondo Seminario dantesco \softline
internazionale, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 ed. M. Picone and T. Crivelli [Florence: Cesati, 1999],  pp. 263-81).  In the most \softline
recent of these two studies, the case is made for our understanding that Dante indeed presents \softline
himself as writing under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, a view that causes understandable \softline
distress, but which is fundamental, in one line of thought, to a better comprehension of his \softline
purposes.  Similar views are to be found in Selene Sarteschi ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV 49-53: Dante e il \softline
'Dolce stil novo'.  Verifica di una continuit{\f3 \'42} ideologica," in her }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Per la "Commedia" e non per essa \softline
soltanto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Rome: Bulzoni, 2002 (1995)]), pp. 97-137.  For a curious blending of (1) an old and (2) \softline
a new view, see Carlo Paolazzi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La maniera mutata: Il "dolce stil novo" tra Scrittura e "Ars \softline
poetica"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita e Pensiero}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Pubblicazioni dell'Universit{\f3 \'42} Cattolica, 1998]), who attempts \softline
(1) to resuscitate an actual 'school' of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stilnovisti}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , including the major figures Guinizzelli, \softline
Cavalcanti, Dante, and Cino da Pistoia, all of whom are related, according to Paolazzi, by (2) \softline
significant borrowings from concepts found in Horace's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ars poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and from the language of \softline
Scripture.  A major impediment to accepting such a view is the fact that Dante's text explicitly and \softline
without possible exception (unless one were to argue that Bonagiunta simply does not know \softline
whereof he speaks -- a difficult position to support) says that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dolce stil novo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  began with \softline
'Donne ch'avete,' ca. 1289, thus omitting at least Guinizzelli from 'membership.'  In addition, \softline
Dante's treatment of Cavalcanti in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  makes any such evaluation more than merely \softline
dubious, as Danilo Bonanno agrees (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La perdita e il ritorno. Presenze cavalcantiane nell'ultimo \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 1999]), pp. 50-52.  On the other hand, that Dante and Cino were, \softline
according to Dante, fellow 'stilnovisti' seems more than likely.  For an attempt to make the school \softline
even more inclusive than a surely questionable Romantic view had done, see Gorni ("Paralipomeni \softline
a Lippo,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Studi di filologia italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  47 [1989]), pp. 27-29; in a similar inclusive vein see Pasquini \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e le figure del vero: La fabbrica della "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: Bruno Mondadori, 2001]), \softline
pp. 33-36.  The cause of much of the problem as it is misconstrued by Dante's critics is that they \softline
try to establish what really happened in the history of Italian poetry, while Dante himself puts \softline
forward only what he decided had really happened.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bonagiunta's response may be paraphrased as follows: 'Now I understand the \softline
nature of the knot that held back the Notary [Giacomo da Lentini], Guittone [d'Arezzo], and me \softline
from the sweet new style that at this very moment I am hearing!  Now I clearly understand how \softline
your pens [plural] followed strictly after the words of the "dictator," something that ours did not; \softline
and in that lies the entire difference between your [Dante's] "new style" and ours.'  He falls silent, \softline
as though, it seems, satisfied with his utterance.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab What exactly does Dante mean by the phrase 'sweet new style'?  This is surely one of the \softline
key questions presented in the poem, and not one of the easiest.  Further, who else wrote in that \softline
'style'?  And what is the significance of the fact that Bonagiunta says that he hears it }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 now}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (in \softline
listening to Dante here in purgatory? in current Tuscan poems composed on earth? [but how 
would he }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 hear}{\plain \fs24 \f1  these?])?  What follows is a series of hypotheses that sketch out this writer's views \softline
of the major aspects of a difficult question.\par
}{\plain \fs28 \f1\fs28 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \f1 (1) The passage, probably written ca. 1311-12, marks the first time that the beguiling \softline
phrase 'dolce stil novo' had ever been used in the vernacular that we call 'Italian.'  That it was \softline
meant to refer to or to identify an actual 'school' of poets that existed before the date of its \softline
inscription in Dante's text may not be assumed (see Emilio Bigi ["Genesi di un concetto \softline
storiografico: 'dolce stil novo,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  132 (1955), pp. 333-71] and Guido Favati [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inchiesta sul Dolce Stil Nuovo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le Monnier,1975)], although it \softline
frequently is.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab (2) On the other hand, the author{\u8217\'92}s (or Bonagiunta's) plural 'vostre' should be seen as \softline
including not only himself, but also Cino da Pistoia (the one fellow poet whom Dante believed had \softline
understood the theological significance of his Beatrice), if perhaps no one else (see Hollander \softline
["Dante and Cino da Pistoia," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  110 (1992), pp. 201-31] and Furio Brugnolo ["Cino \softline
(e Onesto) dentro e fuori la }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Omaggio a Gianfranco Folena}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Pier Vincenzo \softline
Mengaldo (Padua: Editoriale Programma, 1993), pp. 369-86]).  For reasons to believe that Cino \softline
himself, as evidenced in his poem of tribute, 'Su per la costa,' written after Dante's death, believed \softline
that Dante's plurality of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 penne}{\plain \fs24 \f1  included him, see Luciano Rossi ("Il }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nodo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Bonagiunta e le }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 penne}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
degli stilnovisti: ancora sul XXIV del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Fictio poetica: Studi italiani e ispanici in \softline
onore di Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Katherina Maier-Troxler and Costantino Maeder [Florence: Cesati, \softline
1998]), pp. 49-50.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab (3) The significance of the poetic stance struck in the phrase should be understood in \softline
theological terms.  Dante is not presenting himself as a usual love poet, but as one who serves as \softline
God's scribe in recording the result of God's love for him through the agency of Beatrice.  \softline
Benvenuto, so insensitive (and even hostile) to Dante's claims for a theological basis for his \softline
writing, has a wonderfully angry gloss to vv. 52-54: 'inspires me': you should not understand: with \softline
the love of divine grace, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 as certain people falsely interpret}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (italics added), but indeed with \softline
lascivious love.'  It is interesting that Benvenuto feels he must oppose those who are reading the \softline
poem theologically in his own day.  We do not have any record of such an understanding of these \softline
lines; it is heartening to know that it existed.  John of Serravalle (comm. to verse 58) follows his \softline
master in thinking Amor here is but the 'god' presiding over the world's oldest indoor sport.  \softline
Dante and others had previously written in a 'sweet' style; but only he, now, in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , writes \softline
in this 'sweet new style' that creates a theologized poetry that is like almost no one else's (see \softline
Mazzotta [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Poet of the Desert}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979)], pp. 197-210; \softline
Zygmunt Baranski ["Canto VIII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert \softline
and Michelangelo Picone (Florence: Cesati, 2001)]), pp. 392-94.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab (4) The word 'style' here has a broader connotation than it usually does in discourse about \softline
poetry, indicating not only a way of writing, but a subject for writing, as was apparent when his \softline
new style of praise in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was presented as requiring new 'matter' (see Hollander, "Dante's \softline
'dolce stil novo' and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: mito e poesia. Atti del secondo Seminario dantesco \softline
internazionale, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 ed. M. Picone and T. Crivelli [Florence: Cesati, 1999],  pp. 271-72; Aversano \softline
["Sulla poetica dantesca nel canto XXIV del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  16 (2000)], p. 131: the \softline
poem is 'sweet artistically because it is new poetically.')  The 'new style' not only sounds different, \softline
it }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 is}{\plain \fs24 \f1  different (but see the differing view of Lino Leonardi ["Cavalcanti, Dante e il nuovo stile," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: da Firenze all'aldil{\f3 \'42}.  Atti del terzo Seminario dantesco internazionale}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Michelangelo \softline
Picone (Florence: Cesati, 2001)]), p. 334.  The very phrasing of the element that sets, in 
Bonagiunta's understanding (vv. 58-59), this 'style' apart from all others -- copying out exactly \softline
what was spoken by the 'dictator' -- points not at all to style, but rather to content.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab (5) We should probably also understand that the phrase 'dolce stil novo' refers to some of \softline
Dante's earlier poetry (only the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  'Donne ch'avete intelletto d'amore' for certain), some of \softline
Cino's poems (at least and perhaps only the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  upon the death of Beatrice, 'Avegna ched el \softline
m'aggia pi{\f3 \'6a} per tempo'), and to Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , thus presenting the author{\u8217\'92}s claims for a \softline
theological grounding of his poem's inspiration as being joined to certain of his earlier poems that \softline
he felt either had, or could be construed as having, the same character.  This is the crux of a \softline
continuing disagreement with those who argue that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is a poem that goes }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 beyond}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stil novo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (e.g., Pertile ["Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Beyond the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stilnovo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13 \softline
(1993), pp. 47-77] or Malato [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Rome: Salerno, 1999)], pp. 105-22), rather than being a \softline
continuation of it.  While privileging a theological reading (if not firmly), Warren Ginsberg \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Aesthetics of Being}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1999)]), p. 88, like \softline
Pertile, is of the opinion that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 's style 'is a new style, which differs from the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stil novo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .'  \softline
In short, while Dante and others (Guido Cavalcanti perhaps the most capable among them) had \softline
previously written in a 'sweet' style, Dante alone developed, on the model of Guinizzelli's lyrics, \softline
poems of praise of a theologized lady, Beatrice.  For discussion of a specifically Christian \softline
reformulation of traditional images of the god of Love in the fourth stanza of the poem that Dante \softline
authorizes us to think of as the first poem of the 'sweet new style,' see Vincent Moleta ("'Voi le \softline
vedete Amor pinto nel viso' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 V.N.}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , XIX, 12]: The Roots of Dante's Metaphor," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  110 \softline
[1992], pp. 57-75).  For a review of the entire question of Dante's relations with Guido and of the \softline
debate over their nature, see Enrico Fenzi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La canzone d'amore di Guido Cavalcanti e i suoi \softline
antichi commenti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Genoa: il Melangolo, 1999), pp. 9-70.  See also Enrico Malato (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e Guido \softline
Cavalcanti: il dissidio per la {\u8220\'93}Vita nuova{\u8221\'94} e il {\u171\'ab}disdegno{\u187\'bb} di Guido}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Rome: Salerno, 1997)]); \softline
Emilio Pasquini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e le figure del vero: La fabbrica della "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: Bruno \softline
Mondadori, 2001]), pp. 48-68; Giuliano Tanturli ("Guido Cavalcanti contro Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Le \softline
tradizioni del testo: Studi di letteratura italiana offerti a Domenico De Robertis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. F. \softline
Gavazzeni and G. Gorni [Milan: Ricciardi, 1993], pp. 3-13); Nicol{\f3 \'62} Pasero ("Dante in Cavalcanti: \softline
ancora sui rapporti tra }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  e }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Donna me prega}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  22 [1998], pp. 388-414); and Selene Sarteschi, "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Donna me prega}{\plain \fs24 \f1 -}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita Nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : La direzione di una polemica," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rassegna europea di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  15 [2000], pp. 9-35).  And, for a return to the view that \softline
would make Guido a companion of Dante in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dolce stil novo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see Danilo Bonanno (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La perdita \softline
e il ritorno. Presenze cavalcantiane nell'ultimo Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 1999)]), pp. 50-52.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 56.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In a single line Bonagiunta crosses off the list of illustrious precursors two of the \softline
great poetic figures that preceded Dante, Giacomo da Lentini (died ca. 1250) and Guittone \softline
d'Arezzo (ca. 1230-94).  Giacomo was the first major Italian practitioner of lyric, and is looked \softline
upon as the inventor of the sonnet and as the founder of the so-called Sicilian School, the first \softline
group of writers of lyric in Italian, taking their models from the writers of lyric in Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al.  \softline
Dante is later still harder on Guittone (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.124-126 and note), who, as Dante came \softline
to poetry in the 1280s, was perhaps the pre-eminent Tuscan poet.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-62.}{\plain \fs24 \f1    Letterio Cassata ("Un'ipotesi per }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Pg}{\plain \fs24 \f1  24, 61-62," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Critica del testo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 [2001]), p. \softline
307, paraphrases these lines as follows: 'e chi vuole accingersi a procedere pi{\f3 \'6a} in l{\f3 \'42} non {\f3 \'50} pi{\f3 \'6a} in \softline
grado di vedere il divario dall'uno all'altro stile' (and he who would prepare himself to go more 
deeply into the matter is no longer in a position to distinguish the difference between the one style \softline
and the other).  It is a difficult text to be sure of.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-74.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The two similes, piled one upon the other, return to a technique not observed in \softline
some time: a comparison based on an antique source coupled with a completely 'vernacular' and \softline
'ordinary' one.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.1-15, where ancient and contemporary elements are combined \softline
in a single simile, and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.25-39, where local Tuscan agriculture and Elijah's ascent to \softline
heaven are the contrasting elements in two neighboring similes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The first of this pair derives, fairly obviously to today's reader, instructed by the notes in \softline
the text, from Lucan (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.711-716), a description of cranes fleeing winter's cold to winter \softline
on the Nile.  Nonetheless, for all the certainty in recent commentators that this is a reminiscence \softline
of Lucan, it was only with Torraca (comm. to vv. 73-75) that it seems first to have been observed.  \softline
Lucan's passage is revisited even more plainly at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.73-78.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Forese's remark is perhaps the high point in the fraternal affection found in purgatory, \softline
as he looks forward to Dante's death as the necessary precondition for their next meeting in the \softline
afterlife.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Notable is Dante's calm assurance that he will be saved.  This may seem prideful, \softline
but is rather the natural result, or so he would have us believe, of his having been chosen for such \softline
an experience of the afterworld.  God, he would ask us to imagine, would not have selected as His \softline
scribe one destined to die in sin.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Porena (comm. to vv. 79-81) suggests that the world-weary tone of the protagonist \softline
reflects less the Dante of the year 1300, at the peak of his political success, than the exiled poet of \softline
ca. 1310 (the date that Bosco/Reggio [comm. to vv. 77-78] suggest for the composition of this \softline
part of the poem).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Corso Donati, brother of Forese, was, in Dante's eyes, the Black Guelph who bore \softline
'the greatest blame' for Florence's problems (and for his own) because of his alliance with Pope \softline
Boniface VIII, the 'beast' who will drag him to hell -- as Dante will see before much time passes.  \softline
In fact, through the magic of post-event prophecy (Corso was killed on 6 October 1308), Forese \softline
is able to promise the protagonist this happy vengeance.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Corso had supervised the murderous taking of the city by the Black Guelphs after Charles \softline
of Valois had led his French troops into Florence in November 1301.  In a political reversal that is \softline
not totally unlike Dante's own, he was condemned to death by the priors for trying to take power \softline
into his own hands in a supposed arrangement involving the Tuscan Ghibelline leader Uguccione \softline
della Faggiuola, to whose daughter he was married.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab While the 'beast' in Forese's account is clearly metaphorical, Corso apparently did die \softline
while trying to escape, either in a fall from his horse or by being lanced by one of his captors once \softline
he had fallen -- or even as he was hanging from a stirrup, dragged along the ground.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The military simile fits the tone of the death scene of Corso that has just been \softline
narrated by his brother.  Here, by way of returning to the rigors of his penance, Forese is allowed \softline
to assume the role of the cavalryman who goes out to make the first contact of battle.  Virgil and \softline
Statius, described by a word perhaps never seen before in Italian, 'marshals,' are left behind, but 
are calmly directing the battle, as it were.  As for Dante, that retired cavalryman (see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.95), it is not clear what role he plays, but he is a subordinate to these two marshals, \softline
those great poets who led other humans into knowledge and virtue through their works.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Forese has rounded the terrace and is now beyond the reach of Dante's sight, \softline
just as his prophecy, obscure now in 1300 before the event of Corso's death, has escaped Dante's \softline
understanding.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Moving along the terrace with his eyes fixed on Forese, Dante does not at first \softline
see the tree that his own movement forward has brought him to.  The second tree of this terrace \softline
has caused less puzzlement than the first one (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.131-135); the succeeding verses (116-117) answer most questions that one might have (see the note to vv. 115-117): this tree is an \softline
offshoot of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Adolfo Jenni ({\u8220\'93}Il Canto XXIII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. V \softline
[Florence: Le Monnier, 1972)]), pp. 12-13, argues that the sight of the water from above causing \softline
the leaves to shine makes the penitent gluttons even hungrier.  As was the case with the first tree, \softline
this one is also apparently watered from above (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.137-138).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This simile possibly reflects a passage from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.xii.16) in which \softline
Dante speaks of the natural love of human souls for God, their maker, which is easily drawn off \softline
course: 'Thus we see little children setting their desire first of all on an apple, and then, growing \softline
older, desiring to possess a little bird, and then still later desiring to possess fine clothes, then a \softline
horse, and then a woman, and then modest wealth, then greater riches, and then still more' (tr. \softline
Lansing).  The central elements of this image (a man catching the hungry attention of a child by \softline
holding up an apple) are deployed again in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.45.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The penitents (as will be the poets) are urged to turn aside, apparently by the \softline
same voice from within the tree that will warn off the poets (and since the names of exemplary \softline
figures are recited by this voice, we probably correctly assume it speaks to all, triggered by its \softline
sense that someone is approaching, that is, not only in response to these special visitors).  They \softline
are 'enlightened' (in the sense that their first opinion, that the fruit of this tree is desirable, is \softline
changed) when they realize that this tree is a branch from that beneath which humankind first fell \softline
into sin, and thus willingly move away.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again an unseen and unidentified divinely authorized voice speaks from \softline
within the foliage of a tree (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.140-154).  This is an offshoot of the tree of which \softline
Eve (and then Adam, who had also been warned not to [see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.140-141]) ate \softline
the fruit.  Benvenuto's gloss (to vv. 115-120) is admirable: this act of 'gluttony' is seen as the first \softline
sin, even though Adam himself will later (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.115-117) be clear that its cause was not \softline
really appetite for food but the desire to trespass for its own sake (as St. Augustine understood in \softline
his later redoing of the scene in his recounting of his youthful escapade involving the theft of a \softline
farmer's pears [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Confessions}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.iv: 'our real pleasure was in doing something forbidden' -- tr. Pine-Coffin]): the first disobedience is thus the very desire to disobey (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.55-57 for Satan's \softline
pride as the primal sin).  Benvenuto is more alert to Dante's strategy here than many a more recent \softline
commentator,  understanding that the image of eating is germane to Dante's description of 
Gluttony, despite the larger theological meaning of the primal act of sin.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Porena (comm. to vv. 116-117) is one of those who unaccountably believe that there must \softline
be still other trees upon this terrace.  If, indeed, Dante is referring to the two most significant \softline
trees in the original garden, the Tree of Life and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil \softline
(Genesis 2:8), it would seem to be unlikely that he would have wanted us to imagine there might \softline
be others scattered along the terrace.  Porena denies that the first speaking tree (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.141) \softline
is an offshoot of the Tree of Life, but believes that it, too, is derived from the Tree of Knowledge, \softline
an opinion that may seem difficult to justify.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Bosco/Reggio raise a question in their commentary (to verse 115):  Why was the first tree \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.139) approachable, while this one is not?  Would it not seem reasonable that the fruit \softline
of the Tree of Life should be precisely what purgation is preparing penitents to receive?  At the \softline
same time, it would also seem reasonable that they should prepare for their reward by \softline
ceremonially avoiding the site of humanity's original sin.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The voice reminds the travelers (and the penitents, we assume) first of the \softline
'Centaurs, mythical race, half horses and half men, said to have been offspring of Ixion, King of \softline
the Lapithae, and a cloud in the shape of Hera [Juno]' (Toynbee, "Centauri" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante \softline
Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  The Centaurs fought with the Lapiths and Theseus at the wedding feast for \softline
Piritho{\f2\u252\'fc}s (the friend of Theseus and their half-brother) and his bride Hippodamia.  The Centaurs \softline
attempt to rape the bride and bridesmaids but are prevented by Theseus and others.  The final 300 \softline
lines of the scene, which served as Dante's source, in Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.210-535) represent a kind \softline
of tumultuous and comic redoing of the battle scenes in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Iliad}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (and in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), with plenty \softline
of body parts and blood.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the double nature of the Centaurs (beast and man at once), see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.84.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The Hebrews selected by Gideon to make war upon the Midianites were those who lifted \softline
water to their mouths in their cupped hands, as opposed to those who cast themselves down to a \softline
stream to drink directly with their mouths (see Judges 7:2-8).  The ones remembered here are not \softline
the three hundred whom he chose to fight, but the 9,700 who were sent back to their tents.  These \softline
were 'slack' in that they gave in totally to their desire to drink, while the 300 displayed a more \softline
controlled demeanor, more fitting to those who would require composure even in the heat of \softline
battle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-134.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This voice, we shortly come to understand, comes from the angel of \softline
Temperance.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 137-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Singleton (comm. to vv. 137-139) points out that the description of this angel is \softline
indebted to John's Revelation (Apoc. 1:9-20).  The passage, prologue to John's vision, tells how \softline
the apostle was ordered to write it by Jesus, a scene described in terms that at times closely \softline
resemble these.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 145-150.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The last of the similes in a canto rich with them compares the waft of air from \softline
the angel's wing felt by Dante on his brow to the sweet-smelling breeze of May.  Tommaseo \softline
(general note to this canto) suggested a source in Virgil's fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgic}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.415): 'Haec ait et \softline
liquidum ambrosiae diffundit odorem' (She spoke, giving off the flowing fragrance of ambrosia).  \softline
Cyrene is encouraging her despondent son, Aristaeus, to learn his fate from Proteus.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 151-154.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante now 'finishes' the Beatitude (Matthew 5:6) begun in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.4-6, 'Beati qui esuriunt et sitiunt iustitiam, quoniam ipsi saturabuntur' (Blessed are those who hunger \softline
and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied).  In the first context, applying to those \softline
who 'thirst' for riches, only }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sitiunt}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was heard, while here we have the echo only of the word for \softline
hunger, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 esuriunt}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}}