{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\s1 \f1 QuickFormat1;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 31}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's words, perhaps reminiscent of Virgil's to the cowering, hiding Dante in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.88-90, call his (and our) attention to the fact that he has not yet crossed Lethe, i.e., \softline
he still has his sins in mind, as will be hammered home by vv. 11-12.  For the similar formal \softline
arrangements of the beginnings and endings of all the cantos dedicated to the earthly paradise see \softline
Bruno Porcelli ("Progressione e simmetria di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII-XXXIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi e problemi di \softline
critica testuale}{\plain \fs24 \f1  35 [1987], pp. 141-55).\par
}\pard \fs24\s1 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 2-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The metaphor of Beatrice's speech as a 'sword' picks up her earlier promise that \softline
Dante will weep for 'another sword' beside that of Virgil's departure (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.57).  The \softline
lengthy speech that she had directed to the angels (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.103-145) was in fact aimed \softline
squarely at him, using the angels as her apparent primary auditors in such a way as to publicize his \softline
sins and thus shame the protagonist.  In this sense, then, the point of her 'sword' had seemed \softline
aimed at them, while she wounded Dante (if painfully enough, as we have seen) with only the \softline
edge of the blade.  Now he finds her sword pointing straight at his heart.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Chimenz (comm. to vv. 16-18) is perhaps the only commentator to fret over these angels; \softline
he cannot understand how they at first remained hidden from Dante and how so many of them \softline
could occupy so small a chariot (an unconscious resuscitation of the angels-on-the-head-of-a-pin \softline
problem or, perhaps, of the crowded condition of that stateroom in the Marx Brothers' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 A Night at \softline
the Opera}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Most commentators quite naturally assume that they descended from the Empyrean.  \softline
(None does so more clearly than Singleton, who is at least clear in voicing this opinion [comm. to \softline
vv. 13-18].)  We, however, are not told this.  Further, their eventual removal from the scene is \softline
never dealt with, at least not directly (see the note to vv. 77-78).  All we can say is that they either \softline
mount up with the rest of the Church Triumphant (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.89-90) or, since their coming \softline
was so mysterious, that they simply vanish.  Either of two answers would, therefore, on the basis \softline
of the evidence in the poem, be consistent.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 5-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice calls for Dante's confession with specific reference to the list of charges \softline
against him that she had leveled in the last canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.124-132).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's fearful inability to speak with clarity may remind us of his similar difficulty as \softline
he was about to take his ride on Geryon's back (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.92-93).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-11.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Che pense?}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (What are you thinking?): Tommaseo was apparently the first to hear \softline
the resonance of Virgil's identical question to Francesca-dazzled Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.111.  Now \softline
see Lino Pertile ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy," Introductory Readings II: \softline
"Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, Charlottesville: \softline
University of Virginia, 1993]), p. 389.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is perhaps not coincidental that Dante's first two guides, in scenes that are confessional \softline
in nature, both prod him to consider the conflicting natures of lust and charity with the same \softline
question.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's attempt to discharge the dart of his speech from the crossbow that \softline
collapses under the tension of his situation produces a more audible emission of tears and sighs 
than of true confessions, which he can barely whisper.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Perhaps nowhere before or after does the poet make the nature of the love the \softline
protagonist should have had for Beatrice clearer than here.  His desire for her should have led him \softline
to God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1    Beatrice, given Dante's muteness, rehashes the charges we had heard in the last \softline
canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.124-132), now substituting a fresh set of metaphors for those we found there \softline
(see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.118-138).  There we heard that after Beatrice's death (1) he gave \softline
himself to another (or 'to others'; the Italian }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 altrui}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is ambiguous and may be singular or plural); (2) \softline
he chose a wrong path, 'pursuing false images of good.'  Now he is presented first as warrior and \softline
then as lover.  In the first tercet he is like a soldier (or an army) cut off from his pursuit of his goal \softline
by the defensive ditches or chains deployed by an enemy; in the second he is like a courting swain \softline
who parades before the house of the woman with whom he is infatuated.  In the first case, once he \softline
loses his Beatrice he no longer advances toward God; in the second, he moves toward another \softline
and improper destination.  He was turned by his love for the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , who, we may \softline
remember (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXV.2), was seated at her window and looked pityingly at Dante, who then \softline
'parades' before her a pair of sonnets (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXV.15-18; XXXVI.14-15).  If, in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , he \softline
finally returns to his love for Beatrice and is rewarded with a vision of her in the Empyrean, in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  he is writing about the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  again, now as having finally displaced Beatrice in \softline
his affections.  He had looked for consolation from this lady, he says, but he had instead found \softline
gold (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.xii.5).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For this writer's view of this complex matter see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), pp. 159-69.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Here begins Dante's confession.  Mazzoni ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XXXI,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura \softline
Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1965]), p. 62, rightly observes (as, for instance, \softline
Singleton [comm. to verse 6] does not) that the confession will be followed by his contrition and \softline
then by his giving satisfaction.  These three elements in the rite of confession, in that perhaps \softline
puzzling order, occupy the first 102 verses of this canto, with first confession and then contrition, \softline
occupying vv. 31-90 (for the traditional order, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.94-102).  (It should be \softline
noted that the version of Mazzoni's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lectura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of this canto is that published as a separate fascicle in \softline
1965; the version later published in the bound volume of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [1967] is \softline
missing the first fifty or so pages of the 1965 printing.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Finally Dante confesses, summarizing his transgressions as delight in false things \softline
set before him after Beatrice was dead.  Exactly what these pleasures were is a question that \softline
greatly exercises Dante scholars.  It does seem clear that they are presented in so vague and \softline
encompassing a way so as to allow two primary interpretations, that is, both carnal and \softline
intellectual divagations from the love he owed God, awakened in him by Beatrice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's first words to Beatrice set a pattern that will not be broken until }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXXI.80: Dante addresses her with the honorific }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 voi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.131.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice accepts his confession.  That word has already been used at verse 6, 
underlining the precise nature of what is happening here (words for 'confession' only occur three \softline
times in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , where we might expect them to be more common, twice in this canto).  We \softline
may remember that Dante himself had twice served in the role of confessor in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , first with \softline
Francesca (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.118-120 [and see the note to these verses]), then with Pope Nicholas III (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XIX.49).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reference to the Sirens draws us back to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.19-33, the dream of the \softline
Siren and (as at least a few interpreters agree) Beatrice's intervention in Dante's dream to have \softline
Virgil show him the ugliness of the object of his infatuation.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.31-33.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The Ottimo (comm. to vv. 43-47) is one of the very few commentators to think of \softline
Boethius's dismissal of the Sirens (who have so harmed him) in favor of the Muses of Lady \softline
Philosophy (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cons}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.i[pr]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 46-48) was apparently the first to explain the strange \softline
phrase 'to sow tears' by referring to the Bible, Psalms 125:5 (126:5), 'those that sow in tears shall \softline
reap in joy.'  Even so, Dante has made the Psalmist more difficult than he had in fact been: 'sowing \softline
tears' is not quite the same thing as 'sowing in tears' (i.e., planting seed while weeping).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 47-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's phrasing offers a good example of the cause of the difficulty many have \softline
in interpreting her role in this poem.  She tells Dante that her buried flesh should have led him \softline
elsewhere from where he elected to go (in this context, clearly other women [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cosa mortale}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
'mortal thing']).  This is not because she was more beautiful in her fleshly being than they, but \softline
because she offered him what they did and could not, 'il sommo piacer' (the highest beauty).  The \softline
verbal noun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 piacer}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is used only once in the first half of the poem (it describes Paolo's physical \softline
attractiveness at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.104).  When it is found again (at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.21), it then occurs thirty-four times in the second half, twenty-one of these in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  It is often used to denote the \softline
highest beauty of all, that of God.  The word is used three times in this canto (vv. 35, 50, 52), its \softline
densest presence in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  The false beauty of Beatrice's rivals (verse 35) should have been \softline
countered by the highest beauty that he had found in her.  The phrase 'sommo piacer' was \softline
traditionally interpreted as referring to Beatrice as the most beautiful of all mortals.  I.e., Dante's \softline
failure was in chasing after women who were not as beautiful as she was.  This disastrous \softline
interpretation, undermined by the very antithesis present in Beatrice's formulations, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sommo piacer \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 / }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cosa mortale}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which polarizes divine and human beauty, was intelligently dismissed in Mazzoni's \softline
gloss ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XXXI,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1965]), \softline
pp. 67-72.  Mazzoni demonstrates that Dante is relying upon the Victorine tradition that discussed \softline
the beauty of God, even as it was manifest in individual human beings, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 summa pulchritudo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(highest beauty) in the phrase of Hugh of St. Victor (p. 68).  (For a study of Dante's ideas about \softline
beauty see John Took [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 "L'etterno piacer": Aesthetic Ideas in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Oxford: Clarendon, 1984)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ].)  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's next instalment drives the point home, again separating the spiritual \softline
from the physical -- if readers tend to fail to notice what she has done.  The 'deceitful' things of \softline
this world are distinguished from those of the next in that Beatrice tells Dante that, once she was \softline
no longer associated with this world, his affection should have followed her upward.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We are given yet another (now the third) version of Dante's sins after Beatrice's \softline
death (see the note to vv. 25-20).  Instead of flying up after dead Beatrice's spirit, the wings of his \softline
affection drooped down to earth in search of a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pargoletta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (young girl) -- the sexual note is struck \softline
again -- or 'other novelty of such brief use,' a phrasing that would again allow the understanding \softline
that Dante's divagation also involved some sort of intellectual experiment that now seems without \softline
eventual value.  See Sara Sturm-Maddox ("The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rime Petrose}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and the Purgatorial Palinode," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Philology}{\plain \fs24 \f1  84 [1987], pp. 119-33) for the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pargoletta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (young girl) as a key to \softline
Dante's retraction of the sexual love he so frankly displayed in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rime petrose}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (stony rhymes), \softline
where he refers (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rime}{\plain \fs24 \f1  C.72) to a marble-hearted young girl.  It is also true that Dante wrote at \softline
least two still earlier poems about a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pargoletta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rime}{\plain \fs24 \f1  LXXXVII.1 and LXXXIX.2.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 62-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Proverbs 1:17, 'Frustra autem iacitur rete ante oculos pennatorum' (In vain is \softline
the net cast forth before the eyes of full-fledged birds).  (The citation was first observed by Pietro \softline
di Dante [Pietro1, comm. to vv. 61-63]).  Dante, as grown up 'bird,' should have been able to \softline
avoid capture by his huntress(es).  Poletto (comm. to vv. 61-63) noted another citation of this text \softline
in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.21, also cited by Mazzoni ("Saggio di un nuovo commento alla }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina \softline
Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : il Canto IV dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  42 [1965]), p. 72.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-67.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Understandably, Dante is now compared, in simile, not to a mature man, who \softline
should have known better, but to a naughty boy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 68.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Continuing the motif introduced in the preceding simile, this verse has had the effect \softline
of convincing some readers that the usual portraits and busts of Dante are all incorrect in showing \softline
him as clean-shaven.  However, all that is probably meant is that he was old enough to know \softline
better because he was old enough to shave.  In the same vein, some have argued that Beatrice \softline
only indicates Dante's chin (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mento}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , referred to in verse 73).  Even so, his chin is 'bearded' if he has \softline
to shave it.  For a brief and cogent review of the argument, see Mazzoni ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto \softline
XXXI,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1965]), pp. 73-74.  And for a \softline
hypothetical meditation on the iconographic valence of Dante's beardedness that essentially \softline
bypasses the issue that attracts most readers (and which involves an astonishingly large \softline
bibliography) -- whether Dante meant us to understand that his face was bearded or not -- see \softline
R.A. Shoaf ("Dante's Beard: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sic et non}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  31.68]," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Magister Regis: Studies in Honor \softline
of Robert E. Kaske}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Arthur Groos and others [New York: Fordham University Press, 1986], \softline
pp.171-77).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The formal 'classical' simile is clear in its intent: Dante, for all the reticence of his \softline
contrition, is finally won over.  Its resonance, however, is subtle and not observed in the \softline
commentary tradition.  R.A. Shoaf ("Dante's Beard: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sic et non}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  31.68]," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Magister \softline
Regis: Studies in Honor of Robert E. Kaske}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Arthur Groos and others [New York: Fordham \softline
University Press, 1986], pp. 176-77, decodes the passage well.  He points out that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
IV.196-278 presents Iarbas's appeal to Jupiter to intervene on his behalf in his suit for widow \softline
Dido's hand, an appeal that results in Mercury's coming to Aeneas to spur him to his Italian \softline
voyage.  The simile that gives birth to this one is found, Shoaf continues, at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.441-449, \softline
when Aeneas is compared to a deeply rooted oak tree buffeted by north winds when Dido makes \softline
her last-ditch appeal to him to stay with her in Carthage.  In the end, he remains strong enough in 
his new resolve to deny her request and set sail.  Here, the 'new Aeneas,' buffeted by the south \softline
wind, gives over his stubborn recalcitrance and accedes to the insistent demand of Beatrice, a new \softline
and better Dido, that he express his contrition.  Where it was good for Aeneas to resist the \softline
entreaties of his woman, it is also good for Dante to yield to Beatrice's.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 77-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Since Beatrice's hundred angels are not referred to directly again, we can only \softline
conclude that, after this last act of theirs, they disappear, either into thin air or else to fly back up \softline
to the Empyrean, along with the rest of the Church Triumphant (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.89-90).  While \softline
the text guarantees no solution, the second hypothesis seems the better one, if only because we \softline
have no reason to exempt them from the general exodus that occurs at that point, even if their \softline
arrival is not clearly accounted for (see the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.16-18 and XXXII.89-90).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrasing 'one person in two natures' makes it difficult to accept the arguments of \softline
those who believe the griffin is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  a symbol of Christ.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 velo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (veil) reminds us that the climactic moment of an unveiling still lies \softline
before us.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.66.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The climax of Dante's contrition is performed as a fainting fit.  He is now ready to \softline
perform his act of satisfaction, forgetting all his divagations, canceling them from his memory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's immersion in Lethe, supervised by Matelda, marks his final satisfaction of \softline
his confessor's demands on him.  As we will see (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.91-99), his forgetting that he ever \softline
transgressed against Beatrice's instruction will be used by her as proof that he had indeed done so.  \softline
Here we understand that the act of forgetting is an act of atonement, and is rewarded with \softline
absolution, indicated by the Latin song he hears as he completes his crossing of Lethe.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As for Dante's drinking of the waters, it has a Virgilian source, according to Pietro di \softline
Dante (Pietro1, comm. to vv. 94-102) and, among the moderns, Mattalia (comm. to verse 102): in \softline
Lethe's waters the souls 'longa oblivia potant' (drink in long forgetfulness [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.715]).  As we \softline
shall see at Eunoe (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.138), the ingestion of the waters of these two rivers is essential \softline
to the accomplishment of (here) leaving one's sins in oblivion and (there) securing in memory all \softline
the good things accomplished in one's mortal life.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Does Statius also drink of these waters?  And does Matelda have oversight for his \softline
crossing of Lethe as well as Dante's?  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.128-135.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The Ottimo (comm. to vv. 97-99) identifies the phrase 'Asperges me...' (Purge me [with \softline
hyssop, that I may be purified; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow]) as deriving from 'the \softline
penitential Psalm' (50:9 [51:7]) and goes on to report that the phrase is repeated in the rite of \softline
absolution when the priest blesses the confessed sinner with holy water.  We have less certain \softline
information about who it is that sings the words.  Among those commentators who venture an \softline
opinion, most assume it is the angels who sing, but it could be the (still unnamed) Matelda (as \softline
Porena [comm. to verse 98] admits, even though he prefers the angels).  Since the angels have \softline
served as singers before (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.19, XXX.21, XXX.83-84), the most reasonable hypothesis \softline
seems to be that it is they who sing now, as well.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Massimiliano Chiamenti's reading of vv. 92-96 ("Corollario oitanico al canto ventottesimo \softline
del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo e rinascimento}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13 [1999]), p. 211n., would seem to suggest that the 
contact here between Matelda and Dante is of a sexual nature, a reading that does not exactly \softline
command immediate assent.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The four nymphs represent the four cardinal virtues (Justice, Prudence, \softline
Temperance, and Fortitude) in their primal form, i.e., as they were infused in Adam and Eve (and \softline
not acquired, as they have had to be ever after).  'God created the first humans, and no others, in \softline
this state.  They are 'nymphs' in that, like some classical nymphs, they inhabit a woodland \softline
landscape (Lombardi [comm. to verse 106]).  The stars they are in heaven are probably (there is \softline
debate about this) identical with those we saw in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.23 (also referred to in I.37-39 and \softline
VIII.91), irradiating the face of Cato with their light.  Dante thus seems to suggest that both Cato \softline
and Beatrice are of such special virtue that it seems that original sin did not affect them -- a notion \softline
that could only be advanced in the sort of suggestive logic possible in poetry, for it is simply \softline
heretical.  Dante never did say (or would have said) such a thing in prose.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The exact sense in which they served as the handmaids of Beatrice before she lived on \softline
earth is less easily determined.  For two similar views of the problem see Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to \softline
Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)]), pp. 159-183, and Mazzoni \softline
({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XXXI,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1965]), pp. 82-86.  Both of them link the infused cardinal virtues to Beatrice's special role on earth, reflected in \softline
such passages as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.76-78, where she is addressed by Virgil as 'donna di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 virt{\f3 \'6a}}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' (lady of \softline
such virtue that by it alone / the human race surpasses all that lies / within the smallest compass of \softline
the heavens).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Botticelli-like (as in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Primavera}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , surely shaped by this scene), the four dancing maidens \softline
make a composite sign of the cross with their upraised arms, which join over Dante's head.  All \softline
redeemed sinners leave the garden of Eden on their way to glory in the moral condition that \softline
marked the creation of the first humans, before the Fall: primal innocence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The four cardinal virtues, representing the active life, insist that, while they are \softline
able to escort Dante to the eyes of Beatrice, their sister virtues, the theological three, at the right \softline
wheel of the chariot, are more appropriate presences to prepare Dante's vision for that moment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice has moved down from the chariot, from its left side, where she was \softline
looking at Dante across the stream (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.61 and 100), to, now that he has crossed it, a \softline
point in front of the chariot and of the griffin that draws it, so as to confront Dante.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The four virtues prepare Dante to do something that will become, very quickly, \softline
the standard way of learning for the protagonist in this new Beatricean realm of the poem: gaze \softline
into her mirroring eyes.  As Bosco/Reggio (comm. to these verses) explain, 'In medieval lapidaries \softline
the emerald symbolized, in addition to chastity, justice.  Further, in a passage of Brunetto Latini's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tresor}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (III.xiii.16), Dante's direct source, green eyes (of an emerald color) were considered an \softline
attribute of feminine beauty.  It should be added, finally, that the emerald functioned as a mirror, \softline
and the eyes of Beatrice will be compared precisely to a mirror (vv. 119-122).  This new \softline
interpretation has been put forward by V. Bertolucci Pizzorusso, in}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Studi mediolatini e volgari }{\plain \fs24 \f1 17 \softline
(1969).'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 reggimenti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (regiments, governments, regimes [in modern Italian]) would 
seem to give aid and comfort to those who have argued that this passage makes it difficult to \softline
argue for the traditional interpretation of the griffin as Christ.  However, beginning with Venturi \softline
(comm. to this verse), commentators have understood that here the word is synonymous with \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 atteggiamento}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (in the sense of bearing, self-presentation).  Daniello (comm. to vv. 118-123) had \softline
previously understood the word as indicating that the griffin behaved 'now as man, now as God.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's sixth address to his readers in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  asks that we share his wonder \softline
(see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.94-96).  The griffin himself is constant in his appearance, while his \softline
reflection in Beatrice's eyes, revealing his truer aspect, reflects, in turn, his divine and human \softline
natures.  The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 idolo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 hapax}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , derives, according to Bosco/Reggio (comm. to verse 126), \softline
from the discussion of the idols of the pagan gods found in Isidore of Seville (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etym}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.xi.13).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stupore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (amazement, wonder) is again Dante's condition, now for the marvelous \softline
nature of his simultaneous perception of God's two natures.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.34-36.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 128-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again Scartazzini is the first commentator to find the likely citation behind \softline
Dante's words and to be followed, always without acknowledgment, by any number of twentieth-century discussants of the passage: Wisdom speaks in Ecclesiasticus 24:29: 'He who eats of me \softline
will hunger again, who drinks of me will thirst again.'  That the speaker in this passage is Wisdom, \softline
the second person of the Trinity in Christian eyes, pleases Singleton (comm. to these verses), who \softline
had argued earlier for the close relationship between Beatrice and Christ as Sapience (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to \softline
Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)]), pp. 122-34.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 131.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'other three' are obviously the three theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and \softline
Charity, equally obviously of higher 'rank' than the older classical cardinal virtues.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 caribo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has had extensive discussion among Dantists.  Most currently \softline
agree that it indicates a particular dance, even if not an identifiable one.  For extensive \softline
bibliography see Mazzoni ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XXXI,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le \softline
Monnier, 1965]), pp. 89-91.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The three theological virtues sing their appeal to Beatrice, requesting that she \softline
unveil her mouth.  The moment recalls an experience recorded in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  'Here it is necessary \softline
to know that the eyes of wisdom are her demonstrations, by which truth is seen with the greatest \softline
certainty, and her smiles are her persuasions, in which the inner light of wisdom [Sapienza] is \softline
revealed behind a kind of veil; and in each of them is felt the highest joy of blessedness, which is \softline
the greatest good of paradise.  This joy cannot be found in anything here below except by looking \softline
into [her] eyes and upon her smile' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.xv.2-3, tr. Lansing).  It is important to know that \softline
these words are directed to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 another}{\plain \fs24 \f1  lady, also known as Wisdom, in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , namely the \softline
Lady Philosophy, the one who came as the replacement for the then supposedly less worthy \softline
Beatrice.  That Dante clearly revisits that passage from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here is a fairly common belief \softline
among current discussants of this one.  Only a few (e.g., Mazzoni [{\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XXXI,{\u8221\'94} in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le Monnier, 1965)], pp. 90-95; Giacalone [comm. to vv. \softline
136-138]), however, realize that Dante wants to separate the sort of affection he felt for the lady 
he celebrated in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  then from that which he feels for the lady he celebrates here and now.  \softline
Further, the allegory operative then (eyes as demonstrations, mouth as persuasions, of the \softline
abstraction philosophy) is nowhere evident here, where we now find only the smile unveiled.  In \softline
her eyes Dante has just now seen what he can currently understand of Christ's two natures; in her \softline
smile he perceives that he is loved with the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 etterno piacer}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (eternal beauty -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.32) that \softline
is reflected from her lips.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 seconda bellezza}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (second beauty) of Beatrice also may remind the reader of the \softline
'corollary' or extra gift that Matelda bestowed upon the three poets at the end of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXVIII.136.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139-145.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 luce etterna}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (eternal living light) that is God has its }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 etterno piacer}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (eternal \softline
beauty) reflected in Beatrice, her loveliness the mirror of the beauty of God.  This direct address \softline
of Beatrice's smile (which seems -- intentionally, we must believe -- to be represented as an object \softline
illuminated fully by God's light) sounds so much like an invocation that it apparently fooled at \softline
least one reader into taking it as one.  See Marina De Fazio ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX," in  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's \softline
"Divine Comedy," Introductory Readings II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
(virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1993]), p. 434.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This passage is reminiscent of that in}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.139-148, the description of the \softline
smiles of recognition on the part of Virgil and of Statius when they discover that Eden represents \softline
the true Golden Age.  No pagan poet, no matter how deeply inspired by drinking of the Castalian \softline
spring on Parnassus, could have written of the meaning of his vision of the Golden Age in a way \softline
that could come near to equaling what this Christian poet (by virtue of his faith, not of his talent), \softline
having now drunk of Lethe, can tell of God's love in making his first human creature innocent and \softline
allowing His creature a chance to regain that lost innocence, which is what Dante has been \softline
allowed to accomplish here, while still in the flesh, and what he will finally accomplish after his \softline
death. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 143.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The pronoun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 te}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the second person singular of 'you') is jarring, in that we have \softline
already learned that Beatrice is to be addressed by Dante with the honorific }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 voi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (at verse 36).  It \softline
takes us a moment to realize that it is not Beatrice whom he apostrophizes here, but her smile.\par
}}