{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\fnil \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MathA;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f4\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 15}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 1-6.  This belabored opening has bothered any number of readers.  Benvenuto, \softline
commenting on its six verses, remarks that all Dante means to say is that it is the hour of Vespers, \softline
and that he does so by means of circumlocution ('per unam circuitionem verborum').  However, \softline
Arnaldo Bonaventura (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto XV del "Purgatorio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [("Lectura Dantis Orsanmichele"), Florence: \softline
Sansoni, 1902]), pp. 9-10, chides Venturi (comm. to verse 3) for labeling the construction a \softline
'miserabile similitudine' (perfectly dreadful simile) and remarks that such lighthearted moments are \softline
also to be found in the Psalms of David and in the epics of Homer and of Virgil.  Cachey \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]:}{\plain \fs24 \f1  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Special Issue,}{\plain \fs24 \f1 12 [supplement], 1993), pp. 212-14, following, as he says, Longfellow (comm. to verse 1), and who speaks of Dante's poetry as \softline
being playful, has learned to enjoy the poetic playfulness of vv. 1-40, so long softly ridiculed and \softline
even characterized as a result of the poet's letting us see his worst (pedantic) side.  Longfellow, \softline
bringing a fellow poet's perspective to the passage, had realized that Dante is not a stuffed owl \softline
and perceived that his fellow poet is having a little fun with himself and with us: 'Dante states this \softline
simple fact with curious circumlocution, as if he would imitate the celestial sphere in this \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scherzoso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  movement.  The beginning of the day is sunrise; consequently the end of the third hour, \softline
three hours after sunrise, is represented by an arc of the celestial sphere measuring forty-five \softline
degrees.  The sun had still an equal space to pass over before his setting.  This would make it \softline
afternoon in purgatory, and midnight in Tuscany, where Dante was writing the poem.'  For a \softline
similar time-telling passage see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.25-26 and the accompanying note.  Here, however, \softline
Dante underlines his ludic propensity in his first rhyme: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 terza}{\plain \fs24 \f1 -}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scherza}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as though to imply that this \softline
very }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tercet}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is itself }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 playful}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is to Cachey's credit that he builds his treatment of the entire canto on his sense of this \softline
initial burst of 'childish' enthusiasm.  Exuberance is the strand that ties together many elements of \softline
the canto, from its beginning to its end, juxtaposing youthful, innocent play against older 'high \softline
seriousness.'  The morning sun is not currently shining on the mount of purgatory but is \softline
summoned in order to begin the canto, and is then followed by a series of benign presences: Dante \softline
(both as poet and as protagonist); the Angel of Mercy; Virgil's representation of the loving souls \softline
in paradise, including Beatrice; the twelve-year-old Jesus and his mildly chastising mother; the \softline
youth who kissed the daughter of Pisistratus and this non-judgmental father; the youthful martyr \softline
Stephen; the 'drunken' protagonist.  The exuberant love of God and ecstatic awareness of His \softline
presence eventually fills the canto.  Mario Marti ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letture dantesche.  II. \softline
"Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. G. Getto [Florence: Sansoni, 1965 (1961)], pp. 63-79, deserves credit for \softline
seeing the canto's virtues, given its history of relative neglect among the commentators, and \softline
especially its engagement with light, a theme insisted upon even more forcefully by Tibor Wlassics \softline
("Il canto XV del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Filologia e critica dantesca: Studi offerti a Aldo Vallone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Florence: Olschki, 1989]), pp. 172-74, who comments upon the many words for light found in \softline
vv. 7-33 and reflects that they function as corrective responses to the darkness that typified our \softline
experience of Envy.  He might have added that Canto XV exists as a sort of island of light \softline
between the blindness of Envy and the encompassing black smoke of Wrath, which the \softline
protagonist will enter at the end of this canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a review of the debate as to whether the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 spera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (verse 2) refers to the sun itself, \softline
the celestial sphere it occupies (or still other things) see Enzo Esposito ("Il canto XV del \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le Monnier, 1969]), pp. 171-74.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 7-12.  The travelers, proceeding to their right as they climbed the mountain, have now moved \softline
some 90}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  along the circle of which it is the center.  The sun, at 3pm, is thus to the northwest as it \softline
heads west ahead of them.  Where it was behind them before (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.16-18), it now stands \softline
directly before them, brighter than it has been, to Dante's sight, at any point yet in the poem.  This \softline
excess of light will carry forward into the brightness of the ecstatic light that is soon to flood the \softline
inner eye of the protagonist.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 13-15.  Poletto (comm. to this tercet) calls attention to the passage in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (III.ix.10) in \softline
which Dante says that Aristotle had confuted Plato's notion that our eyesight went out from us to \softline
take cognizance of external things, arguing (correctly, adds Dante) that things that we perceive \softline
through the eyes (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lo visibile }{\plain \fs24 \f1 -- the noun that Dante uses here) strike upon our senses, not the \softline
senses on them.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.69.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 16-24.  This simile introduces a 'second sun' to Dante's dazzled glance, now the reflected radiance \softline
of the angel, as seems clear from the context and despite some early commentators who believe \softline
this is the direct beam of the light of God or of the sun itself.  It seems to be neither, nor indeed \softline
the direct beam of brightness from the angel of this second terrace.  As the elaborate simile and \softline
the sequential description of the light make plain enough, the light bounces down, like Pele's most \softline
famous goal, in a World Cup final some years ago, and then up, under Dante's protective hand, so \softline
that the angle of incidence is the same as the angle of reflection ({\f2 \'28}{\f2 \'2a}{\f2 \'27}), notions established, for \softline
Dante, by such authorities as Euclid and Albertus Magnus.  For Dante's knowledge of the \softline
phenomenon see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.iii.vi (where he refers to the science of perspective, or optics) and \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.49-50.  Poletto (comm. to this passage) reviews the debate over whether the light \softline
comes straight from God to the angel to Dante or bounces from the angel off the ground and back \softline
up and strongly supports the second view.  And Dante's two evasive actions (shading his eyes \softline
with his hand as the angel approaches; turning away when the reflected ray bounces under that \softline
hand) come close to guaranteeing this reading.  Carroll (comm. to vv. 10-24) adds a moral \softline
dimension to this interpretation: where the light shining from the Angel of Humility (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XII.89-90) was relatively demure, the light of this angel, countering the meanness of Envy even \softline
when reflected off the livid stone floor of this terrace, is brilliant with the loving mercy of God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The notion that these lines themselves reflect a source in Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.22-25) was \softline
perhaps first suggested by Poletto and enjoys some currency.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 28-33.  Virgil's promise that eventually Dante's eyes, as his soul becomes more fit for the task, \softline
will be able to look upon angelic radiance without turning away is fulfilled at least in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXX, vv. 10 and 18, where this word for 'angel,' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 messo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 messaggiero}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) -- 'messenger,' is next \softline
(and for the last time) employed (it was introduced to the poem in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.85).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 36.  The 'stairway' to the third terrace will be less steep than those to Pride and Envy.  The slowly \softline
disappearing P's on Dante's brow, the increasing lightness of his being, the increasing ease of the \softline
ascent, all these elements underline the general improvement of the penitent's moral condition, \softline
comparable to that of a patient who has survived a crisis and now grows rapidly stronger.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 38-39.  A portion of the fifth Beatitude in Matthew (5:7), 'Bless{\f4 \'50}d are the merciful, for they shall \softline
obtain mercy,' is here accompanied by an Italian phrase.  In one later moment (on the terrace of 
Gluttony, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.151-154) Dante will set the angel's recasting of one of the Beatitudes in \softline
Italian.  Here he offers biblical Latin conjoined with a subsequent Italian expression.  Various \softline
issues have puzzled various commentators of this somewhat surprising conjunction.  (1) What \softline
biblical text do these words paraphrase?  (2) Who speaks, the angel or the penitents that Dante \softline
leaves behind?  (3) Are the words directed to Dante or are they some sort of general expression?  \softline
(4) Why does the speaker (whoever it is who speaks) resort to Italian?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab (1) Most commentators after Daniello (comm. to verse 39) are drawn to the subsequent \softline
text in this chapter in Matthew's gospel (5:12), Jesus's conclusion of his sermon, in which he tells \softline
those who are true to Him to '}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rejoice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gaudete}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in \softline
heaven'; others (after Pietro di Dante [Pietro1, to verse 39]), however, prefer Paul's words in \softline
Romans 12:21: 'Be not overcome by evil, but }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 overcome}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ("vince") evil with good'; still others \softline
(comforted by Longfellow [comm. to verse 39]), Revelation 2:7: '}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 To him who overcomes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
("vincenti") will I give to eat of the tree of life.'  It is difficult to be sure which of these is the most \softline
apt, but context, proximity, and support in many commentaries give the text in Matthew a certain \softline
advantage.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In order to answer the last three questions, it is probably necessary to consider the entire \softline
program of the angelic utterances to Dante during his penitential ascent of the mountain.  These \softline
moments occur as follows: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.110-111; XV.38-39; XVII.68-69; XIX.49-50; \softline
XXII.5-6; XXIV.151-154; XXVII.8-9.  In each of the last five of these the text clearly and \softline
specifically attributes the words to the angel.  Only the first and second are, when we first read \softline
them, opaque, but surely allow the possibility that some other source accounts for them (most \softline
probably the souls of the penitents of the terrace that Dante is about to leave).  Nonetheless, it is \softline
at the very least probable that the angel speaks on these first two occasions as well.  Given the \softline
fact that this is the case on each and every later terrace, we must surely allow that this seems the \softline
wisest hypothesis to follow.  We should also take note of the facts that on the sixth terrace the \softline
angel paraphrases a Beatitude in Italian rather than reciting a phrase from it in Latin (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXIV.151-154) and that, on the seventh, his practice is exactly as we find it here: Latin for the \softline
citation of the Beatitude, Italian for his concluding advice to Dante (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.8-9; 10-12).  \softline
And there is one further common element in the second and seventh scenes: in all the others there \softline
is specific reference to the angel's wing or feathers erasing a 'P' from Dante's forehead; in these \softline
two scenes there is no such description, thus leading us to speculate that the angel's Italian \softline
utterance is probably meant to coincide with the erasure, a linguistic gesture that accompanies the \softline
undescribed act of absolution, as Esposito ("Il canto XV del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture \softline
dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le Monnier, 1969]), p. 181, suggests for this occurrence.  That \softline
three angels speak Italian, two in part, one wholly, is a suggestive detail in a poem that is raising \softline
the vernacular to a level it had not sought heretofore.  (For the program of Italian in the speech of \softline
angels see Kevin Brownlee ("Why the Angels Speak Italian: Dante as Vernacular }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Poeta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Poetics Today}{\plain \fs24 \f1  5 [1984], pp. 597-610); for that of the Beatitudes in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.110.)  It seems likely that here the angel speaks, addressing Dante in \softline
Italian.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 40-45.  The protagonist, now freed, as we perhaps are meant to understand, from the P of Envy, \softline
is rapidly improving.  It is he, and not Virgil, who insists on using the traveling time for self-improvement; he would like, in a sort of postlude to the terrace of Envy, to understand the remark \softline
of Guido del Duca (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.86-87): 'O race of men, why do you set your hearts on things that 
of necessity cannot be shared?'  The moral consequence of such affection is to envy the possessor \softline
of what one longs for but cannot have; we remember that Satan, barely created (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXIX.55-57), immediately was prideful against his Maker (because of his envy of His power).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The word 'Romagna' occurs four times in the poem, twice in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and twice in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.39; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.154; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.67; and here).  That section of Italy thus \softline
refers to Guido da Montefeltro, Fra Alberigo, Jacopo del Cassero (as well as to Buonconte da \softline
Montefeltro), and to Guido del Duca, perhaps indicating that neither family nor region determines \softline
one's likelihood to be damned or saved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 46-57.  Virgil's gloss on Guido's words in the last canto distinguishes earthly desires for individual \softline
possessions from heavenly enjoyment of the common good.    Commentators, beginning with \softline
Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to vv. 43-57), cite the following passage from Augustine's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 City \softline
of God}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (XV.v): 'nullo [enim modo] fit minor, accedente seu permanente consorte, possessio \softline
bonitatis, quam tanto latius quanto concordius individua sociorum possidet charitas' ([goodness] \softline
is in no way lessened when it is shared, whether fleetingly or permanently, but grows the more the \softline
love of it spreads in others -- Latin quoted from the version found in Pietro's commentary).  While \softline
Picone ("Canto XV," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges G{\f3\u252\'fc}ntert and \softline
Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), pp. 231-32, prefers the candidacy of a passage in \softline
a sonnet of Giacomo da Lentini ('Or come pote s{\f4 \'58} gran donna entrare'), the context and expression \softline
are extremely close to the passage in Augustine.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 58-63.  If Dante's will to learn is good, his capacities still flag, held back by his earthly view of \softline
riches and of the very nature of possession, which he can only conceive as selfish.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(III.xv.10) Dante had understood very well what his fictive self here still does not comprehend: 'li \softline
santi non hanno tra loro invidia' (the saints have no envious feelings about one another).  \softline
Scartazzini (comm. to verse 74) was perhaps the first commentator to produce this citation in this \softline
context.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 67-75.  Virgil's final resolution of Dante's problem insists on the centrality of love as antidote to \softline
envy.  Indeed, words for love (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 amore}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 carit{\f4 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 amare}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ama}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) occur four times within seven lines.  \softline
Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine "Comedy": Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1992], p. 330, n. 39), also notes the insistence on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pi{\f4 \'6a}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (more) in vv. 55-62 (an astounding 8 \softline
occurrences in 8 lines, the densest presence of a single word in any passage of the poem, one \softline
might add) and here (vv. 73-74), perhaps underlining the need for the incremental conceptual \softline
refinement necessary for the redefinition of human affection toward a better end.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 69.  Virgil's phrasing here relies on the notion that bodies of light themselves attract light. \softline
Singleton (comm. to this verse) cites passages to this effect in St. Thomas (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ST}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I-II, q. 85, a. 2, \softline
resp.) and in Dante (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.xiv.3).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 70.  The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ardore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is, for Wlassics ("Il canto XV del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Filologia e critica \softline
dantesca: Studi offerti a Aldo Vallone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1989]), p. 166, the key word of this \softline
canto, uniting the notions of flame and of affection in its main significations.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 77.  Beatrice's second naming in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see VI.46; XVIII.48).  In her first nominal 
appearance (after }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.70 and II.103, where she is first named by Virgil and then herself), she \softline
first seems to be associated with hope (VI.32; 35); in her third, with faith (XVIII.48).  Is she here \softline
associated with charity?  If she is, what is the consequence for the traditional identification of \softline
Beatrice as 'Revelation' or 'Theology' (and of Virgil as 'Reason')?  (Beatrice is named 63 times in \softline
all in the poem; Virgil, 31.)   See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.46-48.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 79-81.  The clear reference here to the erasure of the second P earlier on calls attention to the \softline
problem that Dante has set for us, to determine exactly when this happened.  See the note to vv. \softline
38-39.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 82-84.  Dante's failure to respond to Virgil here perhaps prepares us for his more dramatic \softline
inability to communicate with his guide at the sudden appearance of Beatrice (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.43-51).  \softline
It also has the effect of underlining the totally present and commanding nature of what he \softline
experiences in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 raptus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : there is nothing else that can hold his attention.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab We now probably expect, on the basis of the experience we have had of the first two \softline
terraces, a description of the terrace upon which the travelers have just set foot (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.20-33, \softline
XIII.1-9).  Its suppression here is obviously deliberate (we will find it, postponed as it is, only at \softline
the end of the canto at vv. 139-145 and then continuing into the next canto).  In this way the poet \softline
underlines the heightened importance of the visionary experience granted to the protagonist on \softline
this terrace.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 85-114.  The three visions that follow are set off from the narrative by a precise vocabulary of \softline
vision, one that Dante had established as early as in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see Hollander ["}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita Nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : \softline
Dante's Perceptions of Beatrice,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  92 (1974)], pp. 3-7).  This begins at once with \softline
the verse 'Ivi mi parve in una visione...' (There it seemed to me... in a... vision...), a formulation \softline
that needs at least its verb to take its meaning.  If that verb were a form of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vedere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (to see), Dante's \softline
usual practice would assure us that he was describing a dream, indeed a 'Macrobian' dream, a \softline
'fictive' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 visio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that required allegorical explanation.  The next line, however, adds two crucial \softline
terms, the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 estatica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (ecstatic) and the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 esser tratto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (to be drawn up).  These technical \softline
terms, the first of which occurs only once in the poem's universe, establish the radical difference \softline
between this visionary experience and that obtained in conventional dreams, for here what is at \softline
stake is the sort of sight that was given to such as Paul and John in the New Testament (and, as \softline
we shall see in a few lines, to St. Stephen as well).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In Dante the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 parere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  can have two quite different meanings (a common enough \softline
phenomenon in early modern poems -- see Spenser, for instance, who 'specializes' in the first \softline
usage) -- 'seem' (thus expressing a potentially limited or even non-existent truthfulness) or \softline
'appeared' (to indicate something perceived that is actually present).  The verbs }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 parere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 apparire}{\plain \fs24 \f1  are used throughout this passage (vv. 85, 93, 94, 102) to indicate presences that are \softline
experienced as being in fact present to the beholder in his ecstatic seeing; this is true as well of the \softline
verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vedere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (vv. 87, 106, 109), used each time to indicate what has truly been made manifest to \softline
the beholder.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Momigliano's discussion of this passage points out that the verbs used to indicate what the \softline
protagonist sees in his rapture are in their infinitive form (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vedere}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , v. 87; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dir}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , v. 97; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 risponder}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , v. \softline
103; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ancider}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , v. 107; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 chinarsi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , v. 109), thus lending to the experience a sense of timeless, \softline
placeless intensity -- precisely, one is encouraged to add, in accord with the nature of ecstatic 
experience.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 85-86. What is the precise meaning of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vis{\f4 \'56}one}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as it is used here?  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the word \softline
was used six times to denote dreaming and, at the conclusion, once to denote 'vision' (in the \softline
Pauline or Johannine sense -- see Hollander ["}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita Nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Dante's Perceptions of Beatrice,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  \softline
Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  92 (1974)], p. 9).  In the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  it is used a total of 10 times, as follows: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IX.18; here; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.34 (in the same sense as here); }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.56; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.7; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.41; \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.49 (in all these three last cases denoting the power of sight in general); }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.128; \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII.50; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.62.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX, XIX, and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII it denotes \softline
'dream.'  The other four occurrences include the usage which gave the poem a working title for \softline
some commentators (i.e., 'La visione di Dante Alighieri') at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII and XXXIII.  That \softline
leaves us with the two uses here on the terrace of Wrath.  How do we construe them?  Pietro di \softline
Dante (Pietro1, comm. to vv. 85-87) offers the following bit of medieval etymologizing for the \softline
word 'ecstasy' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 extasis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ): 'ab ex, quod est extra, et stasis, quod est status, quasi extra suum statum' \softline
(from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ex}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , that is, outside, and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stasis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , that is, state: as though outside oneself).  The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vis{\f4 \'56}one}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
modified by }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 estatica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  denotes a very special kind of seeing, one that the poem will return to only \softline
with its final vision in the Empyrean.  Thus the mode of presentation of the exemplars of \softline
meekness is, within the fiction, a preparation of the protagonist for his eventual opportunity to see \softline
God 'face to face.'  Outside the fiction, it is a test of the reader's capacity to understand the nature \softline
of Dantean poetics, reliant upon claims that are, to say the very least, unusual for a poet to make \softline
for his poem, one that will finally offer us precisely }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 una vis{\f4 \'56}one}{\plain \fs24 \f1  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 estatica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Here the text offers us a \softline
foretaste of that final visionary moment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 87-93.  The first exemplar is, as we have learned to expect, Mary.  The narrative that clearly lies \softline
behind Dante's condensation of it is found in Luke's gospel (Luke 2:40-48).  Mary, Joseph, and \softline
the twelve-year-old Jesus travel to Jerusalem at Passover and then the parents leave the city.  In a \softline
remarkable moment, reflected in contemporary accounts of children left behind in cars or on \softline
school buses, they assume the boy is among their traveling companions and finally, discovering \softline
that he is not, return to Jerusalem to seek him out.  Three days later they find him in the temple, \softline
explaining a thing or two to the rabbis (a moment that this writer had brought to mind when the \softline
fourteen-year-old Aaron Hollander [no relation] pointed out an error made by this Hollander in \softline
the first Collegiate School Colloquium in February of 2000.)  If Dante abbreviates the rest of the \softline
episode in Luke, Mary's words to her son are translated almost precisely from Luke's Latin into \softline
Italian: 'Fili, quid fecisti nobis sic?  Ecce pater tuus et ego dolentes quaerebamus te.'  \softline
Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 85-105) point out that it is Dante's practice to translate Mary's Latin \softline
words from their religious sources with precision, probably as a sign of reverence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Jesus as young genius is so palpably present that we need to remind ourselves that he is \softline
not the exemplary figure here; that is, indeed, his mother, who scolds him as gently as a scold may \softline
scold -- as any former child will testify, remembering similar encounters with sterner mothers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 94-105.  The second exemplar, once again a parent, is the sixth-century B.C. Athenian tyrant \softline
Pisistratus, known to Dante in this particular, according to many commentators (perhaps \softline
beginning with Pietro di Dante [Pietro1, comm. to vv. 94-96]), from Valerius Maximus, author of \softline
that first-century compendium of classical history and lore, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Facta et dicta memorabilia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , who tells \softline
the tale almost precisely as Dante retells it here.  However, as Giampietro Marconi, in his entry 
"Valerio Massimo" (ED.1976.5) points out, none of the six passages in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
traditionally cited as being of Valerian provenance may in fact be so.  Of all the six (the other five \softline
occur as follows: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.107-108; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.7-12; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.55-57; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.145; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXIX.115-116), he says, this one is the most likely to be so, although it might roughly as easily \softline
be derived from John of Salisbury's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Policraticus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a text with which we are certain Dante was \softline
familiar.  In short, the question of direct Dantean knowledge of Valerius's work is currently not \softline
resolved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Like the first of these three examplary scenes, this one also begins with the portrait of a \softline
mother.  Where the parents of Jesus are united in benevolence, those of the daughter of Pisistratus \softline
are divided; this mother, reminiscent of the haughty Michal (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.65 and note), leaves the \softline
performance of a loving forgiveness to her husband.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 97-99.  The wife of Pisistratus refers to the myth of the naming of Athens which Pietro di Dante \softline
(Pietro1, comm. to these verses) says derives from Augustine's retelling of the myth, found earlier \softline
in Varro, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De civitate Dei}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.9.  During the kingship of Cecrops, when Athena (Minerva) \softline
and Poseidon (Neptune) both wanted to name the city, the other gods chose Athena because her \softline
gift was the olive tree, seen as more useful to humans than Poseidon's gift of a spring.  Pietro also \softline
refers to the version of the tale found in Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.70-102).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 106-114.  The artistry of Dante's treatment of the third and final exemplar, St. Stephen, the first \softline
martyr (Acts 7:54-59), is greatly admired; e.g., by Francesco De Sanctis (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Opere}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. 5 [Turin: \softline
Einaudi, 1967 (1869)]), who, while not offering the passage an extended treatment in his Dantean \softline
writings between 1853 and 1859, nonetheless refers to it warmly and frequently, making his \softline
admiration clear (pp. 27, 333, 420, 466).  Among the three narratives exemplifying meekness, this \softline
is the only one in which that meekness is found in the youthful protagonist of the exemplary tale \softline
rather than in a parent.  Arnaldo Bonaventura (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto XV del "Purgatorio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [("Lectura Dantis \softline
Orsanmichele") Florence: Sansoni, 1902]), p. 29, sees that the progression of figures that benefit \softline
from the forgiveness which runs counter to wrath has a purposeful order: from a beloved son, to a \softline
relative stranger, to one's enemies.  Anyone would forgive the twelve-year-old Jesus his 'night out' \softline
in the temple; anyone, upon reflection, should perhaps forgive the youthful flamboyance of the \softline
amorous pursuer of a king's daughter; hardly anyone would choose to forgive his murderers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Botterill's entry for "Martyrdom" in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Dante Encyclopedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Richard Lansing, ed.,  \softline
[New York: Garland, 2000]), pp. 595-97, cites Isidore of Seville's definition of martyrs as 'those \softline
who have suffered agonies in order to bear witness to Christ' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etymologies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.xi) and goes on to \softline
point out that Jesus, for His death on the cross, was in a real sense the first martyr to the Christian \softline
faith.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 107.  The youthfulness of Dante's portrayal of Stephen (as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giovinetto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) has caused controversy, \softline
beginning with Scartazzini's (comm. to this verse) objection that here Dante had fallen into a small \softline
error, since the Book of Acts portrayed Stephen as a mature man (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 homo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vir}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : e.g., Acts 6:5, \softline
6:13).  In Scartazzini's view, in a lapse of memory Dante had conflated the descriptions of \softline
Stephen and St. Paul, present as the youthful (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 adulescentis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) Saul as a witness to the martyrdom \softline
(Acts 7:57).  To this argument Poletto (comm. to vv. 106-108) objects, demonstrating that in \softline
Dante adolescence lasted until one is 25, while youth included the period between 25 and 45 \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.xxiv.1-3), and also pointing out that Scipio and Pompey (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.52) are described as 
'youths' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giovanetti}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), 33 and 25 years old, respectively, at the time of those great victories to \softline
which Dante refers.  Sarolli, "Stefano" (ED.1976.5), is also in this camp.  Vandelli, refurbishing \softline
the Scartazzini commentary to this verse argues that the description of Stephen's face as 'angelic' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 faciem eius tamquam faciem angeli }{\plain \fs24 \f1 -- Act.6:15) and a sermon attributed to St. Augustine \softline
(discovered by Orazio Bacci ca. 1902) stating that the proto-martyr shed his blood in the flower \softline
of his youth, both deprive Scartazzini's point of its force.  It seems clear, nonetheless, that Dante \softline
wanted to make Stephen seem more innocent in his youthfulness; Arnaldo Bonaventura (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto \softline
XV del "Purgatorio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [("Lectura Dantis Orsanmichele") Florence: Sansoni, 1902]), p. 28, suggests \softline
that his practice here is much like that by which he made the sons of Ugolino younger, thus \softline
creating a more piteous scene in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.  See the note to vv. 1-6 of this canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Esposito ("Il canto XV del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le \softline
Monnier, 1969]), p. 189, cites Fedele Romani ("Il martirio di S. Stefano: Nota dantesca," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Raccolta di stud{\f3\u238\'ee} critici dedicata ad Alessandro D'Ancona, festeggiandosi il XL anniversario del \softline
suo insegnamento}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Barbera, 1901]), pp. 539-42, for possible sources of this scene in the \softline
visual arts, as well as Arnaldo Bonaventura (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto XV del "Purgatorio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [("Lectura Dantis \softline
Orsanmichele") Florence: Sansoni, 1902]), pp. 28-29, who suggested the possible influence of \softline
Giotto's depiction of the stoning in the old Duomo outside Arezzo, destroyed in 1561.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 108.  In Acts the words of the maddened crowd supplied here by Dante are not given.  Wlassics \softline
("Il canto XV del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Filologia e critica dantesca: Studi offerti a Aldo Vallone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Florence: Olschki, 1989]), p. 170, argues that Stephen's persecutors shout to themselves, not to \softline
one another, as almost all commentators (and translators) insist.  Before him Casini/Barbi (comm. \softline
to this verse) do allow for this possibility, but only Mattalia, also commenting on it, had \softline
previously chosen this option.  This interpretation is supported by at least one pressing \softline
consideration: in the source text (Act. 7:56) the stoners of Stephen are specifically described as, \softline
having stopped up their ears, crying out with a loud voice and rushing upon their victim.  They are \softline
shouting rather to screw up their courage than to exhort one another -- they are shouting as do \softline
those who charge in battle, wrestling with their fear.  Our translation preserves this understanding \softline
of the verse.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 111.  What is seen by 'the eyes that are open to Heaven' is described in the source text in \softline
Stephen's own words (it is notable that Dante suppresses the words spoken by the proto-martyr \softline
and adds those spoken by his persecutors).  Here is what he says he sees (Acts 7:56): 'Behold, I \softline
see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.'  It is precisely \softline
these words, reporting his vision, that cause his murderers to stop up their ears and attack him in \softline
their offended rage.  In this moment in the poem, we may reflect, Dante's eyes (referred to, just \softline
before the visions begin, as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 luci vaghe}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [eager eyes] at verse 84) are as open to Stephen's \softline
martyrdom as Stephen's are to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  heavenly vision.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 112-114.  The final action of these exemplary protagonists of mercy is obviously the most \softline
dramatic in the program: Stephen forgiving his murderers even as they murder him.  His 'look' \softline
would 'unlock compassion' in anyone who beheld it -- perhaps even his persecutors, but surely any \softline
decent Christian soul witnessing his martyrdom, including, just now, the protagonist.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 115-138.  On each terrace there is poetic space reserved for some sort of reaction on the part of 
the poet or protagonist (and, at times, his guide) to the experience of exemplarity.  Of the thirteen \softline
other passages devoted to these transitional moments (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.94-99; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.64-69; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XIII.40-42; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.142-151; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.40-45; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.127-129; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.139-142: \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.34-36; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.121-123; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII.1-6; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.127-132; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXV.136-139; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.49-51) none is even nearly as lengthy as this one, twenty-four verses; in fact \softline
only once is such a passage as long as three tercets, while this one extends over eight.  It is clear \softline
that the poet wanted to direct our attention to the importance of this exchange between guide and \softline
protagonist.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Virgil's reactions give rise to a number of questions.  Does or does not Virgil see the \softline
visions vouchsafed Dante?  Is his response (vv. 120-123) evidence that he does }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  understand \softline
the nature of Dante's experience (as Dante seems to believe at vv. 125-126)?  If a reader believes \softline
that to be the case, how does that reader respond to Virgil's insistence that he indeed knows \softline
Dante's innermost thoughts (vv. 127-138)?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The structure of the fifteenth canto is formed by three moments of Virgilian interpretation \softline
of phenomena:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 10-39: Dante cannot behold the angel: Virgil explains the nature of the problem;\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 40-81: Dante did not understand Guido del Duca's words in the last canto: Virgil gives the \softline
necessary commentary, acknowledging Beatrice's higher authority;\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 115-138: Dante has a series of ecstatic visions: Virgil insists on explaining that he knows \softline
very well what they involved and says that he only calls attention to Dante's condition in order to \softline
spur him on.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In the first two scenes Virgil is clearly correct and thoroughly in control of the situation; in \softline
this last sequence he does not exactly issue triumphant.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 115-117.  The literal sense is not difficult: Dante was not seeing that which was present before his \softline
fleshly eyes; from that point of view (the merely physical one) he is delusional, is seeing what does \softline
not exist, seeing erroneous phantasms instead of what his physical eyes would report.  But such \softline
'errors' as these are the very heart of truth, or, in an extreme case of litotes (deliberate \softline
understatement), are, at the very least, 'not false.'  See the discussion in Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine \softline
"Comedy": Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992]), pp. 151-53.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 118-123.  Virgil's first response to Dante's 'awakening' back in the world of lesser truth is a bit \softline
brutal in its colloquial insistence on a less than noble cause for his condition.  For Dante's apparent \softline
drunkenness see Glending Olson ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII and the Perversions of Pentecost," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  117 [1999]), pp. 25-26.  Olson addresses the relationship between these and the \softline
seemingly 'drunken' words of Boniface VIII, as described by Guido da Montefeltro in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXVII.99.  The context of Acts 2:13 is clearly present here as well: witnessing the Apostles \softline
speaking in tongues after the descent of the Holy Spirit upon them, the cynical pronounce them to \softline
be 'drunk with new wine.'  It is interesting to see that Virgil is associated, in his response to \softline
Dante, similarly filled with the Spirit, with those who denied the action of the Holy Spirit in the \softline
Apostles (see Lauren Scancarelli Seem ["Dante's Drunkenness and Virgil's Rebuke (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . 15.115-138)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 (1991)], p. 74).  Constance Breinin (Princeton '82) has also \softline
suggested the resonance here of Isaiah (Isaiah 28:7), where 'the priest and the prophet have erred \softline
through strong drink...; they err in vision, they stumble in judgment.'  Seem (p. 74) points out that \softline
Dante's 'drunken' condition here, shortly after he has heard Beatrice's name (XV.77), mirrors his 
being 'come inebriato' (as though drunk) when he first saw Beatrice, as recorded in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 124-126.  Dante's response to Virgil intrinsically explains his physical condition as the result of his \softline
being in a state which granted him the ability to see that which, apparently, Virgil did not and \softline
could not see.  If Virgil did not know this before he asked his question, he does know this much \softline
now -- not what Dante saw, but the nature of his seeing: ecstatic vision.  Dante here shares the \softline
iconography of another closed-eyed visionary, John the Divine; see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.143-144, \softline
where John, represented as the last book of the New Testament, Revelation, is seen, like Dante \softline
here, walking in a visionary state with his eyes closed, 'dormendo.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 127-129.  Virgil's claim for knowledge of even the least particular of Dante's mental awareness \softline
must be taken with skepticism (see discussion of Musa's arguments in the note to vv. 134-135).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 130-132.  What does Virgil know?  We have some information with which to answer this \softline
question.  On the terrace of Pride Virgil and Dante found the two sets of opposing exemplars \softline
displayed in marble carvings.  Having seen the first set of these, once they had seen the second \softline
they could infer something about the structure of purgation and about its symbolic landscape.  As \softline
a result, once Virgil hears the voices flying overhead, representing Charity, the virtue contrasted \softline
with Envy, he immediately understands that there will be a second set of sounds before the \softline
travelers leave the terrace (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.37-42).  His situation here is more difficult, \softline
for he has seen nothing to indicate this terrace's mode of exemplary instruction.  According to \softline
him, he reads Dante's mind.  Perhaps we should view his claim with a certain dubiety.  Dante \softline
speaks, announcing that he is seeing things that are not visible; as soon as Virgil connects that \softline
information with the physical signs that his 'drunken' charge is exhibiting, he understands: the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 exempla}{\plain \fs24 \f1  on this terrace are delivered through ecstatic vision, an experience reserved for only the \softline
elect.  He knows that these visions must present positive figures of the opposing virtue, precisely \softline
'to open your heart to the waters of peace,' as he tells Dante.  No matter who may have been \softline
present in Dante's visions to represent meekness (and even Virgil may have by now divined that \softline
Mary will be the first of these), the meaning of the exemplars here will always be the same: to \softline
pour the water of peace upon the fires of wrath in the heart.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 133-135.  Bosco/Reggio are undoubtedly correct in suggesting that the two previous major \softline
possibilities debated in the commentaries over the literal sense of these verses are both less than \softline
convincing and go on to plead that in these verses Dante uses 'an imprecise expression.'  It is \softline
difficult, surely, but not necessarily imprecise.  See Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine "Comedy": \softline
Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992]), p. 152, whose explanation \softline
of the literal sense is, while not entirely clear, much as our own.  Dante's 'senseless' staggering \softline
reminds Virgil of the condition of those who see only with the inner eye, i.e., who are deprived of \softline
the sensuous organ of sight while they are rapt in a vision.  Fernando Salsano ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto \softline
XV,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1967]), pp. 568-70, reflects upon the \softline
debate as it came into his time.  Cachey ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]:}{\plain \fs24 \f1  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Special \softline
Issue,}{\plain \fs24 \f1 12 [supplement], 1993), pp. 222-23, offers a more up-to-date review of various \softline
interpretations: (1) The current majority view has Virgil referring to himself as being sentient and \softline
thus unlike those who are fooled by outward appearances when they see someone faint without \softline
understanding the reason for the syncope; (2) another group would have Virgil denying that he is 
one who sees only with mortal eyes that cease their function in death.  Achille Tartaro ({\u8220\'93}Il Canto \softline
XV del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio: letture degli anni 1976-{\u8216\'91}79}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Silvio Zennaro, Casa di \softline
Dante in Roma [Rome: Bonacci, 1981]), p. 341, moved the question to better ground: (3) Virgil \softline
is referring to Dante's eyes and body (as indeed the context would suggest).  However, Tartaro, \softline
too, has difficulty with the reasons behind Virgil's protestation (p. 321): 'I did not ask "What's \softline
wrong?" because of your appearance, which was that of a man who stares with unseeing eyes, his \softline
body having lost all vital spirit, but to spur your steps.'  The only interpretation, however, that \softline
seems to offer a clear understanding of the difficult passage is one based on a comprehension of \softline
the tensions that exist here between the protagonist and his guide.  Such a reading has been put \softline
forward by Lauren Scancarelli Seem ("Dante's Drunkenness and Virgil's Rebuke [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . 15.115-138]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1991], pp. 71-82), who argues that what is at stake is Virgil's \softline
attempt to show that he has indeed known the nature of Dante's vision, that he did not think \softline
Dante was merely 'drunk.'  And thus we can understand what he says as follows: 'I did not ask \softline
what was wrong with you because you were having a vision -- of course, I understood that -- but \softline
only because it was now time to get you back on the track.'  As Musa has pointed out (see the \softline
notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.115 and XXIII.25), there is no evidence in the poem, despite Virgil's claim in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII (repeated here), that he actually can read the protagonist's mind -- a capacity \softline
reserved for Beatrice and the other saved souls who interview Dante in the heavens.  Our reading \softline
of the entire passage eventually depends on whether we accept Virgil's protestations here or \softline
question them.  For a step-by-step analysis of the difficult details that have so afflicted the \softline
commentators, see Lauren Scancarelli Seem ("Dante's Drunkenness and Virgil's Rebuke [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
15.115-138]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1991]), pp. 75-80.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 139-145.  The description of this terrace, postponed from its expected space (see the note to vv. \softline
82-84), begins now, as we first perceive the black smoke of anger that will cover the travelers and \softline
the penitents for the entirety of the following canto, the darkest part of}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}}