{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\s1 \qj _26;}
{\s2 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _25;}
{\s3 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _24;}
{\s4 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _23;}
{\s5 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _22;}
{\s6 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _21;}
{\s7 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _20;}
{\s8 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _19;}
{\s9 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _18;}
{\s10 \qj\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _17;}
{\s11 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _16;}
{\s12 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _15;}
{\s13 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _14;}
{\s14 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _13;}
{\s15 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _12;}
{\s16 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _11;}
{\s17 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _10;}
{\s18 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _9;}
{\s19 \qj\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _8;}
{\s20 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _7;}
{\s21 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _6;}
{\s22 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _5;}
{\s23 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _4;}
{\s24 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _3;}
{\s25 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _2;}
{\s26 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _1;}
{\s27 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b PURGATORIO CANTO 04}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-15.}{\plain \fs24   This complex opening passage has its roots in classical and Scholastic discussions \softline
of the nature of the human soul.  Commentators indicate passages known to Dante in Plato \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Timaeus}{\plain \fs24 , putting forth a belief that there are three independent souls in man, a belief found also, \softline
in slightly different form, in the Manichees, and then repeated in Averro{\f1\u235\'eb}s), in Aristotle (}{\plain \fs24 \i De \softline
anima}{\plain \fs24 , arguing against Plato for a single soul, not a plurality of them), Albertus Magnus (}{\plain \fs24 \i De \softline
spiritu et respiratione}{\plain \fs24 ), and Aquinas (}{\plain \fs24 \i Summa theologica,}{\plain \fs24  }{\plain \fs24 \i Summa contra Gentiles}{\plain \fs24 , and \softline
commentary on }{\plain \fs24 \i De anima}{\plain \fs24 ) as these are reflected in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i VN}{\plain \fs24   II.4-5 -- see De \softline
Robertis, ed., }{\plain \fs24 \i Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24  [Milan: Ricciardi, 1980],  pp. 31-32), }{\plain \fs24 \i De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24  (II.ii.6) \softline
and }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24  (III.ii.11-16).  For some of these texts see Singleton's commentary (comm. to vv. \softline
1-12).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Following Aristotle and Aquinas, Dante believed that there was but a single soul in man, \softline
divided first into three faculties or powers (with this meaning, Dante uses, synonymously, the \softline
words }{\plain \fs24 \i virt{\f2 \'6a}}{\plain \fs24  or }{\plain \fs24 \i potenze -- }{\plain \fs24 he uses both of them in this passage): the vegetative (governing \softline
physical growth), the sensitive (governing the feelings), and the rational or intellective \softline
(governing thought).  These are presented by Dante (}{\plain \fs24 \i Conv}{\plain \fs24 . III.ii.11) as 'vivere, sentire e \softline
ragionare' (the force of life, of the senses, of the reason).  Considering what happened within \softline
himself so that, absorbed by the words of Manfred for over three hours (50 degrees of the sun's \softline
ascent), he could so lose track of time, Dante uses the evidence of his senses to argue, as \softline
Aquinas had done before him, that the very fact that parts of the soul cease their function when \softline
one of them is fully enjoined proves that we have not a plurality of souls, for these would simply \softline
continue to function independently at all times.  That is, had Dante's rational soul functioned \softline
unimpaired, he would have noted the passage of time even as he listened to Manfred.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The three faculties are all further divided into subsets, the sensitive soul into two, one of \softline
these including the five senses, and it is to this set (the senses of hearing and of sight) that Dante \softline
adverts here.  See the commentary of Daniello (comm. to vv. 5-6) to this passage and the \softline
discussion of }{\plain \fs24 \i virt{\f2 \'6a}}{\plain \fs24  by Philippe Delhaye and Giorgio Stabile (ED.1976.5), pp. 1050-59, esp. pp. \softline
1053-55.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Singleton (comm. to verse 10) suggests that the apparently forced diction, regarding an \softline
ability to }{\plain \fs24 \i hear}{\plain \fs24  the passage of time, in fact refers to the sound of bells, the primary means of \softline
telling time in the Middle Ages.  Tony Cuzzilla ("The Perception of Time in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . IV.10-12," }{\plain \fs24 \i Electronic Bulletin of the Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24  [May 2002]) points out that \softline
a listener's sense of time, located in the sensitive soul, is impeded when the rational soul is \softline
entirely devoted to what it is seeing (or, as in this case, hearing), thus disregarding the passage of \softline
time.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 10-12.}{\plain \fs24   As Cuzzilla ("The Perception of Time in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Commedia}{\plain \fs24 : }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . IV.10-12," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Electronic Bulletin of the Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24  [May 2002]) has pointed out, the passage \softline
would be less difficult to understand had Petrocchi accepted the variant, found in the Urbinate \softline
Latino 366, 'questa' (for 'quella') in verse 10.  Cuzzilla also muses on the strange fact that \softline
Sanguineti, who bases his edition primarily on that MS, does not include this reading in it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 16-18.}{\plain \fs24   This 'flock of sheep' was made aware of Dante's desire to move upward in the last \softline
canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . III.99).  From behind the travelers they call out their courteous instruction, their \softline
'guidance' now at an end.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-25.}{\plain \fs24   A pseudosimile only because its formal grammatical relations (e.g., 'just as... so') \softline
are not expressed, these verses return to the countryside and the 'humble style' that Dante has \softline
deployed in many of his similes in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  and that typified the sole simile found in the \softline
preceding canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . III.79-87).  The farmer fixes his hedge, by filling holes in it with thorns, \softline
when the grapes come ripe so as to protect his vineyard from thieves.  Steiner (comm. to vv. 19-21) was perhaps the first commentator to note the reference to Matthew 7:14: 'Because strait is \softline
the gate, and narrow is the way, which leads to life, and there are few that find it.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 26-28.}{\plain \fs24   Here is another pseudosimile, even less grammatically ordered than the last, in \softline
which steep paths to towns or to mountain peaks in north and central Italy are compared to this \softline
path, which is even steeper.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 37-39.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil, unacquainted with this place, gives sound provisional advice: it is best to \softline
keep moving up until some indication make the way plain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 41-42.}{\plain \fs24   Beginning with Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to vv. 40-42) there has been a small \softline
battle over the reference here.  Is it to geometry, the line drawn from the apex of the triangle \softline
formed by bisecting the right angle of a quadrant of a circle?  Or is it (as Benvenuto strongly \softline
believed) to the astronomical instrument, the quadrant, which is so called because it replicates \softline
precisely a quadrant of a circle?  In either case the angle of ascent is even greater than 45}{\plain \fs24 \super o}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 50.}{\plain \fs24   It is no wonder, given the steepness of the slope, that Dante completes this part of the \softline
ascent by crawling on his hands and knees (}{\plain \fs24 \i carpando}{\plain \fs24 ).  (For previous uses of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i carpone}{\plain \fs24  \softline
see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXV.141; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXIX.68.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 52-54.}{\plain \fs24   This brief respite may, at least intrinsically, bring to mind the antithetic figure of \softline
Ulysses.  Where he left the east behind him (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.124) and always ventured forward, Dante \softline
now looks back to the east, whence the sun had risen.  The eastern sky, locus of the sunrise, has a \softline
long tradition in Christianity of representing Jesus, the 'light of the world' (John 8:12; 9:5).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Christopher Kleinhenz ("Canto IV," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante's "Divine Comedy": Introductory Readings \softline
II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24  ed. Tibor Wlassics [Charlottesville: Lectura Dantis, University of Virginia, \softline
1993]) pp. 60-61, would seem to suggest that Virgil here is looking back at the path that has \softline
brought them this far, while Dante is looking at the Christ-signifying sun, but there seems to be \softline
no evidence in the text to support this otherwise promising hypothesis.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 55-57.}{\plain \fs24   Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to vv. 55-60) was the first to cite, as a source for \softline
this detail, a passage in Lucan (}{\plain \fs24 \i Phars}{\plain \fs24 . III.247-248), where Arabs, coming south of the equator, \softline
marveled at the fact that the shadows of trees fell to their right, not to their left.  Trucchi (comm. \softline
to these verses) reminds the reader that, here in purgatory, }{\plain \fs24 \i levante}{\plain \fs24 , the place where the sun rises, \softline
is not east but west -- from our perspective in the northern hemisphere.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Dante offers a more extended and entirely similar discussion of these matters in }{\plain \fs24 \i Convivio}{\plain \fs24  \softline
III.v.13-17.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-60.}{\plain \fs24   }{\plain \fs24 \i Aquilone}{\plain \fs24  (line 60 in the Italian) is the north wind.  The tercet repeats the \softline
protagonist's amazement upon seeing the morning sun to his left.  The reader needs to \softline
understand that the poet imagines an 'ideal' left and right in this and other particulars.  That is, 
two people facing one another, in either hemisphere, would each claim that the sun is to the other \softline
hand.  In the astronomical givens of the poem, above the Tropic of Cancer the sun is to the south \softline
of the imagined observer, to his or her right; 'below' the Tropic of Capricorn (this is a \softline
northernizer's view, it should be noted) it is to the north, or left.  Substituting 'north' for 'left' and \softline
'south' for 'right,' the reader may find this passage more readily understandable.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 61-66.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil's explanation of the position of the sun in the morning sky may be \softline
paraphrased as follows: If the sun (the mirror), which moves from one side of the equator to the \softline
other, were in the constellation Gemini (Castor and Pollux, the celestial twins) and not Aries \softline
(where it is now -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.37-40), Dante would see the sun's path (the red part of the zodiac) as \softline
close to the Bears (Ursa Major and Ursa Minor) and thus as far north as it ever gets (at the \softline
summer solstice, 21 June).  It would do this, Virgil adds, in an apparently gratuitous detail (but \softline
see the next passage), unless it were to veer from its ordained path (which of course it will not in \softline
any normal expectation).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab 'Zodiac, a belt of the heavens eighteen degrees in breadth, extending nine degrees on \softline
either side of the Ecliptic, within which, according to the Ptolemaic system, the Moon, Mercury, \softline
Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn perform their annual revolutions.  It is divided into \softline
twelve equal parts of thirty degrees, called signs, which are named from the constellations lying \softline
within them'  (Toynbee, "zodiaco" [}{\plain \fs24 \i Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 ]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 67-75.}{\plain \fs24   Having made this much clear, Virgil goes on to offer Dante a 'thought \softline
experiment' that in fact exactly replicates what was, in Dante's time, considered geographical \softline
actuality.  For Dante, Jerusalem, upon the hill Zion, and the mount of purgatory are precisely \softline
antipodal and share a common horizon (the equator).  From this 'experiment' it quickly becomes \softline
clear that the path of the sun (the 'highway' that Phaeton flew off when he lost control of the \softline
chariot of the sun -- see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XVII.106-108) must pass beneath (south) of Jerusalem \softline
and (in once more northcentric thinking), above (north) of the mount of purgatory.  And thus we \softline
understand why Dante was surprised at the sun's leftness and why he should not have been.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The reference to Phaeton, now making clear the reason for the inclusion of reference to \softline
the possibility of the sun's }{\plain \fs24 \i not}{\plain \fs24  keeping its ordained path, is part of a 'Phaeton program' in the \softline
poem (see Kevin Brownlee, "Phaeton's Fall and Dante's Ascent," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  102 [1984], pp. \softline
135-44).  As Brownlee points out, Phaeton's presumptuous and failed heavenly voyage is set \softline
against Dante's ordained and successful voyage to the otherworld.  That is clearly what the poet \softline
would have us believe.  However, just as in this passage, where reference to the myth seems \softline
otiose, the presence of such a tale has the effect of reminding the reader that Dante is aware of \softline
the Phaeton in himself; that this poem is ever in need of management lest it crash from its own \softline
presumption.  See, with regard to Ulysses, strong statements of a similar view in Teodolinda \softline
Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i The Undivine "Comedy": Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1992]), }{\plain \fs24 \i passim}{\plain \fs24 .  Some support for such a view may be found in the reference to the astrological \softline
sign that marked Dante's birth, Gemini, at the beginning of this convoluted passage (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
IV.61).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 76-82.}{\plain \fs24   The protagonist's rephrasing of what he has learned from Virgil is, one must \softline
admit, easier to grasp quickly than the master's presentation of it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 83-84.}{\plain \fs24   The Hebrews used to see it from Jerusalem but do so no longer because of their 
diaspora.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 85-87.}{\plain \fs24   Appeased, the student has learned his lesson but now would like to know how \softline
much longer he must continue this exhausting journey.  It is interesting that, in a canto in which \softline
the primary new character is the extremely lazy Belacqua, the protagonist is so strongly \softline
presented as wanting to rest -- perhaps more so than in any other part of the poem (but see }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XXIV.43-45).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 88-94.}{\plain \fs24   Even Virgil's answer seems tailored to the concerns of a man who would rather \softline
quit than fight; the final ascent will feel like floating downstream.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 98-99.}{\plain \fs24   The voice that breaks into what has by now become, for most readers, a rather \softline
labored and even fussily academic discussion will turn out to be that of Belacqua.  Named only \softline
at verse 123, he was a 'Florentine, contemporary of Dante, said by the old commentators to have \softline
been a musical instrument-maker; modern research has suggested his identification with one \softline
Duccio di Bonavia' (Toynbee, "Belacqua" [}{\plain \fs24 \i Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 ]).  According to Santorre \softline
Debenedetti ("Documenti su Belacqua," }{\plain \fs24 \i Bulletino della Societ{\f2 \'42} Dantesca Italiana}{\plain \fs24  13 [1906], pp. \softline
222-33), Belacqua was dead before March 1302 but still alive in 1299.  In other words, like \softline
Casella, he would seem to have been, in Dante's mind, a recent arrival.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab His ironic and witty response to the conversation he has overheard immediately wins the \softline
reader's affection.  On the other hand, for a denial that this speech of Belacqua's is in fact ironic, \softline
see Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i Itinerari danteschi}{\plain \fs24 , Premessa a cura di C. Ossola [Milan: Franco Angeli, 1994 \softline
(Bari: Laterza, 1969)], pp. 270-71.)  For a moment we feel drawn out of the moralizing concerns \softline
and serious tones of the two poets.  Raffaele Manica ("Belacqua," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Studi di letteratura, critica \softline
e linguistica offerti a Riccardo Scrivano}{\plain \fs24  [Rome: Bulzoni, 2000]), p. 35, calls attention to the \softline
great importance of Dante's Belacqua to Samuel Beckett's fiction.  According to him, Belacqua \softline
becomes a contemporary myth of irony rather than a depiction of the loss of will; however, he \softline
may not sense how much of the Beckettian view of Belacqua is already present in Dante.  Much \softline
of Beckett's work is a kind of rewriting of the Dantean universe from the point of view of \softline
Belacqua alone, a universe of waiting, boredom, question, and frustration, as in the early short \softline
story 'Belacqua and the Lobster' and certainly including the rock-snuggled hoboes of }{\plain \fs24 \i Waiting for \softline
Godot}{\plain \fs24 .  For at least a moment in this extraordinary exchange, Dante's Belacqua seems to control \softline
the situation.  Of course he will have to be swept aside in the name of progress toward a \softline
Christian goal.  But it is astounding (and heartwarming) to see how greatly Dante empathized \softline
with this character we like to imagine as being so antipathetic to him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Belacqua's first word, 'perhaps,' immediately reveals his character as being indecisive, at \softline
least where goals or noble purposes are concerned; what follows shows his wit, deftly puncturing \softline
the balloon of Dantean eagerness (for he is a man who longs to do some serious sitting -- see \softline
verse }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  IV.52, where he accomplishes that goal).  As we shall see, Dante will fight \softline
back, and we will then have a scene that is reminiscent of the back-and-forth between Farinata \softline
and Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  X.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 105-111.}{\plain \fs24   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i negghienza}{\plain \fs24  (indolence) begins a steady run of words expressing a \softline
desire not to do: }{\plain \fs24 \i lasso}{\plain \fs24  (weary -- 106), }{\plain \fs24 \i sedeva}{\plain \fs24  (was sitting -- 107), }{\plain \fs24 \i negligente}{\plain \fs24  (indolent -- 110), \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i pigrizia}{\plain \fs24  (sloth -- 111).  The words express the point of view of the protagonist, undoubtedly \softline
buoyed by his own recent enthusiasm for spiritual mountaineering, if perhaps conveniently 
forgetting his recent fatigue -- of which Belacqua will enjoy reminding him.  Dante has now \softline
returned Belacqua's delicate barb with a rather hefty blow.  \tab The }{\plain \fs24 \i tenzone}{\plain \fs24 -like tone (see the note \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . VIII.31-39) of jesting rivalry that marks the rest of this scene may have been previously \softline
set in real life.  A tale has come down to us, first found in Benvenuto's commentary (to vv. 106-111), yet almost always cited by later commentators only from the Anonimo Fiorentino's more \softline
pleasing account (to }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . IV.123-126).  According to him, Dante frequently reproached \softline
Belacqua for his sloth.  One day Belacqua quoted Aristotle (the seventh chapter of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Physics}{\plain \fs24 , a \softline
passage also found in }{\plain \fs24 \i Mon}{\plain \fs24 . I.iv.2): 'The soul becomes wise when one is seated and quiet.'  To \softline
this Dante supposedly replied: 'If sitting can make a man wise, no one is wiser than you.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 112-114.}{\plain \fs24   Best in show for laziness, Belacqua is not quashed by Dante's squib; his slow \softline
physical movements are not paralleled by his words, which are winged, his version of 'If you're \softline
so smart, why aren't you rich?'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 115-117.}{\plain \fs24   Rather than what we might expect, a counterthrust from Dante, we receive the \softline
information that he now, with brotherly affection, recognizes this saved soul and approaches \softline
him, despite the physical distress he still feels from that energetic climb of his.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 118-120.}{\plain \fs24   Once again, after having his actions described in ways that mark his physical \softline
laziness, Belacqua takes aim at Dante (and, guilty by association, Virgil): Have you, little man, \softline
quite finished figuring out the obvious?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 121.}{\plain \fs24   The poet's summarizing phrase puts his technique of presentation of Belacqua into \softline
relief: lazy movements and curt speech.  In fact, Belacqua's three laconic speeches spread over \softline
only five lines (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . IV.98-99, 114, 119-120), and not even the full extent of these.  They make \softline
him out, as Dante almost certainly knew him, a familiar figure: a person of little physical energy \softline
and of incisive, biting wit.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 122-123.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's sympathy now governs the mood of the rest of the scene and puts an \softline
end to the aggressive sallies of the finally named Belacqua.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 124-126.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's last question is not without its barb; is Belaqua just being himself?  Has \softline
nothing in him changed even in this state of grace?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 127-135.}{\plain \fs24   In what seems surprising length for so laconic a speaker (first three speeches, \softline
five lines; final speech, nine lines), Belacqua now reveals his other side, not that of a keen \softline
listener waiting for his 'opponent' to fall into the net of his sharp wit, but of a lazy loser who can't \softline
quite get himself organized.  It is, the more we reflect upon it, something of a miracle that God \softline
chose him to join the elect in Heaven (as the protagonist himself thought -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . IV.123-124).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 127.}{\plain \fs24   Belacqua's word of greeting, 'frate,' now used for the first time since we heard \softline
Ulysses -- if with far different purpose (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.124-126) -- address his men as \softline
his 'brothers' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.112), establishes the bond of genuine community among the saved, and \softline
we shall hear it used to address one's fellow twelve more times in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  and five in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Paradiso}{\plain \fs24  (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XI.82, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XIII.94, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XVI.65, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XIX.133, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXI.13, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . 
XXI.131, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXIII.97, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXIII.112, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXIV.55, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXVI.115, }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXIX.15, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXXIII.23; }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . III.70, }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . IV.100, }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . VII.58, }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . VII.130, }{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . XXII.61).  See the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  XIX.133.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For an observation regarding the antithetic relationship between Belacqua and Ulysses \softline
see Frankel ("La similitudine della zara [}{\plain \fs24 \i\lang1040 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \lang1040 . VI, 1-12] ed il rapporto fra Dante e Virgilio \softline
nell'Antepurgatorio," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\lang1040 Studi Americani su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \lang1040 , ed. G. C. Alessio and R. Hollander [Milan: F. \softline
Angeli, 1989]), pp. 125-26.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Does it seem that Belacqua does not realize that Dante is still in the flesh, merely \softline
assuming that he and Virgil are headed up the mountain to purge themselves?  It is possible to \softline
ask this question because, in this exchange, there is no reference to Dante's condition or to the \softline
identity or role of Virgil, subjects that have and will come up in other colloquies on the \softline
mountain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 128-129.}{\plain \fs24   Belacqua, seated, imagines the angel at the gates, also seated, but in every \softline
other respect different from him.  Yet, we should remember, even such as he will eventually pass \softline
through that gate on the way to Heaven.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 130-131.}{\plain \fs24   Where Manfred and his flock were eager to move on to their punishment and \softline
probably have far longer to wait, Belacqua exhibits a slothful hesitance even to consider \softline
shortening his time here.  As the first of the late-repentant, he here establishes the rule that \softline
applies to all whom we meet in the remainder of ante-purgatory, that is, all between Cantos IV \softline
and VIII: there is a prescribed time of waiting for these former sinners, an equal amount to that \softline
which they spent unrepentant for their sins.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 132.}{\plain \fs24   Even his way of describing his last prayer, which in his view saved his soul, \softline
invokes a sense of laziness: it is composed, not of words, but of sighs, a lazy man's prayer if ever \softline
there was one.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 133-135.}{\plain \fs24   Acknowledging that other 'law' of ante-purgatory, of which we have heard \softline
from Manfred in the last canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . III.138-141), Belacqua refers to the possibility that the \softline
sentences of the late-repentant, like those of the excommunicate, may be shortened by the \softline
prayers of the living.  His way of phrasing the possibility makes us tend to agree with him that \softline
he will do the full term of his sentence, since it seems to him unlikely that any of }{\plain \fs24 \i his}{\plain \fs24  friends \softline
would seem to be possessed of 'a heart that lives in grace.'  His speech trails off in dubiety; we \softline
reflect that his last negative words do not contain an appeal to Dante for help with the prayers of \softline
the living.  It is no wonder that Beckett admired him so.  He is the sole 'Beckettian' character \softline
occupying a place in the purposeful and harmonious world of purgation and salvation.  Should \softline
we imagine some of the more sympathetic sinners whom we have met in hell somehow being \softline
able to read Dante's poem, we would have also to imagine their rage and chagrin that such as \softline
they are damned while this lazy ingrate knows the world of grace.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 136-139.}{\plain \fs24   Virgil has had enough of this, perhaps revealing, in his stern tone, his own \softline
sense of the injustice of the salvation of the apparently undeserving Belacqua.  His urgent \softline
summons to recommence the journey upward, abruptly terminating Dante's conversation with \softline
Belacqua before its formal conclusion (as Carroll, in his commentary to these verse, observed), \softline
ends the canto with a note of timeliness that the episode has disrupted.  Belacqua, saved, has all 
the time in the world; Virgil, damned, does not.  Life, or grace, does not always seem fair.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab It is now noon in purgatory and 6pm in Morocco, across from Spain at Gibraltar.  Since \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  II.1-9, when it was dawn, the action on the mountain has consumed six hours (we \softline
learned that it was just after 9am at }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . IV.15-16), just over two and a half of them spent in the \softline
difficult ascent and the meeting with Belacqua.\par
}}