{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}{\info{\author Robert Hollander}{\operator Robert Hollander}
}
\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 10}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The opening verses of the canto tell us that Dante is obeying the angel's warning \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.132) not to look back (in this potentially resembling one of the disciples of Jesus even \softline
more than Lot's wife or Orpheus -- see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.131-132) and that the gate of \softline
purgatory makes such noise because it is so infrequently opened, since most human beings prefer \softline
to pretend that their crooked way is straight and spend eternity in hell as a result.  This last image \softline
will be reinforced immediately by the undulating path through the rock that the travelers must \softline
follow, reminiscent of the sinful life they have left behind, and eventually, as Singleton points out \softline
(comm. to verse 3), by the misconception that what is in fact crooked is straight in Dante's dream \softline
of the Siren (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.7-15).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Poletto's commentary (1894) to this passage reminds the reader of the total contrast \softline
between the solitary state of Dante and his guide, both when they approached the angelic warder \softline
and now, having proceeded farther up the mountain (see verse 21), and the vast crowds of \softline
damned sinners found both inside the gate of hell and before Minos in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.119-120 and \softline
V.12.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab On the question of the relationship between the protagonist here and Orpheus, Lot's wife, \softline
and/or one of Jesus's disciples, the commentary tradition is particularly various.  Of those who \softline
claim the relevance of one relationship or another (some two dozen), almost all do so in their \softline
glosses to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.132, while only three do so here.  More cite the Bible, especially Luke \softline
9:62, than anything else, with the reference to Lot's wife, whether in Genesis (19:26) or in Luke \softline
(17:32), somewhat less present, and that to Orpheus least.  It is curious that Pietro di Dante in his \softline
comment to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX (Pietro1, to vv. 131-132) cites only the first passage in Luke, Jesus's \softline
words to his disciples, while in his comment to this passage he refers only to Lot and Orpheus.  \softline
Similarly inconsistent, Fallani (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.131-132) at first refers to all three; when he \softline
reaches this passage (comm. to vv. 5-6) he has decided that the reference is to Luke, specifically \softline
rejecting Orpheus (and not even mentioning Lot).  It is clear that all three references fit the \softline
context, but it is probably also true, as Fallani evidently realized, that the passage in Luke fits \softline
better than the others, for at least two reasons.  Dante is uniquely referred to here because he, as a \softline
still-mortal being, alone can be ejected from purgatory for improper behavior and denied his \softline
forward trajectory into a very special fellowship, while Orpheus wants to return to his past in the \softline
present, a quite different ambition.  Lot only seems to fit as well as Jesus's putative disciple, since \softline
he is told by God to head for the mountains to escape destruction (Genesis 19:17-26), but \softline
successfully wheedles his Lord into letting him move from Sodom to Zoar instead (apparently \softline
preferring the suburbs to rural isolation), and it is only once Lot is safely inside the new city that \softline
his wife, hanging back, is caught in the firestorm that destroyed the cities of the plain.  That \softline
context does not fit as well as does that of the first passage in Luke, as neither Lot nor his wife \softline
seems much interested in the genuinely new life that God's mountain betokened.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-16.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As opposed to the wide and easy entrance to hell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.20), that to purgatory is \softline
narrow and difficult.  For the reference to the 'needle's eye' [verse 16]), see Christ's words to the \softline
disciples (Matthew 19:24): 'And further I say to you, it is easier for a camel to pass through the \softline
eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Virgil insists on the need for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 arte}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or skill in navigating a tight spot, apparently so as not to \softline
allow Dante to be wounded by the sharp edges of the rock's outcroppings, and thus in not 
following the shortest path along this labyrinthine passageway, but the one that moves back and \softline
forth from the farther wall in order to avoid the protuberances on the nearer.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab His reference to the waning moon (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.127, where we learn the moon was full on \softline
Thursday night) portrays the dark crescent in that body as leading it toward the horizon as it sets.  \softline
It is now Monday morning; the moon was full 3.5 days ago and set in the western sky exactly at \softline
sunrise.  With four days of retardation, 50 minutes per day, it is now setting approximately three \softline
hours and twenty minutes after sunrise.  Since Dante awoke before the gate just after 8am (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IX.44), it is perhaps slightly more than an hour later.  In that time he has been admitted by the \softline
warder and made his way with Virgil through the 'eye of the needle.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This verse distances Virgil from Dante by insisting on his freedom from the body's \softline
weight and yet equates the two travelers as being equally uninformed as to their impending \softline
choices.  We have known that Virgil is not proficient in the ways of purgatory from the outset \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.61-63); now that we are in true purgatory the point is underlined.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-23.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Tobia Toscano ("Canto X," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Neapolitana: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. \softline
Pompeo Giannantonio [Naples: Loffredo, 1989]), pp. 207-8, on two debates among the \softline
commentators: Does this wall make a right or an obtuse angle with the smooth pavement?  Do the \softline
penitents observe what is sculpted on the wall or not?  Toscano strongly supports the notion that \softline
the wall is set at an obtuse angle so that the penitents are able to see what is depicted on it.  If this \softline
were not the case, he continues, God's art would be wasted on them, unable to move their heads \softline
high enough to see the instructive decoration, which would, without their observation, be mere \softline
ornament.  If the terraces are cut into the side of the mountain and if this verse, as many \softline
commentators believe, indicates that the inner bank of every terrace is part of the tapered shape of \softline
the mountain as a whole, then Toscano is correct.  However, should we ever be forced to decide \softline
that, as Pietrobono (1946), Mattalia (1960), and Vazzana ({\u8220\'93}Il Canto X del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove \softline
letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le Monnier, 1970], pp. 65-67) believe, this terrace (and \softline
every other one?) has a perpendicular wall as its inner border, we would also probably deduce \softline
that, in God's realm, even stiff-necked penitents will somehow be able to see all of the sculpting \softline
that is put there for their instruction.  (Dante's illustrators are not much help in this respect; if one \softline
examines the two illustrations of the purgatorial mount found in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Encyclopedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [ed. R. \softline
Lansing, New York: Garland, 2000], pp. 725 and 729, one finds that one shows the first \softline
condition, the other, the second.)  Since Dante never clarified this point and since the manuscript \softline
tradition of the line (verse 30) crucial to its interpretation itself has caused much uncertainty, we \softline
really cannot say what the meaning is.  Bosco/Reggio (1979) contrive a compromise: the lower \softline
part of the wall is slanted, but the rest of it is perpendicular.  This might solve certain problems, \softline
but cannot be supported by the text.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For some of the problems associated with this verse see the note to vv. 22-23.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1   \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Art is clearly a major theme of this canto.  We hear now of the aesthetic \softline
superiority of God's intaglios over the work of the sculptor Polycletus or the creative genius of \softline
nature herself.  At verse 97 we learn, not of Dante's instruction, but of his delight in the intaglios.  \softline
Near the canto's close we are told in a simile of the genuine distress that can be caused by our \softline
looking at a sculpted figure of a crunched human shape in a corbel (vv. 131-134).  All these 
aesthetic moments have at their root the experience of art as moving its audience by its mimetic \softline
capacity.  The morality of the art found on this terrace is not to be doubted, but in this canto (as \softline
opposed to the next) we at first find art treasured for purely aesthetic reasons (but see the note to \softline
vv. 97-99).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The words that make their way through the three descriptions of intaglios in vv. 31-81 \softline
insist on the artistic nature of what the protagonist sees: forms of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 intaglio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : 32, 38, 55; of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imagine}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : \softline
39, 41, 62; of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 storia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : 52, 71, 73.  This art of God, which some commentators have looked upon as \softline
uncannily predicting the eventual sculpture of Michelangelo, may be more advanced than that of \softline
mere mortals, and even of nature, but it somehow does not seem very far removed from that of \softline
Dante himself.  See Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984]), p. \softline
275: 'The exaltation of divine art at the expense of human art paradoxically leads to the exaltation \softline
of that human artist who most closely imitates divine art, who writes a poem to which heaven and \softline
earth contribute, and who by way of being only a scribe becomes the greatest of poets.'  Mazzotta \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Poet of the Desert}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979], pp. 237-52) frames his \softline
discussion of this canto in Dante's supposed 'ambiguity' about the value of fame.  For a spirited \softline
and dubious reply to Mazzotta's compulsion to find 'ambiguity' nearly everywhere in Dante's work \softline
and as the hallmark of his way of thinking and writing, see Mastrobuono (review article of \softline
Mazzotta{\u8219\'27}s book), "Criticism on Ambiguity,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Italian Culture}{\plain \fs24 \f1  5 (1984), pointing out, by listing the \softline
over-abundance of assertions of this view (pp. 16-17), its tendency to distort the problem it \softline
examines.  One might also wonder why in his monograph Mazzotta never even discusses Dante's \softline
own early statement that at least certain elements of poems can be understood plainly because \softline
their authors know what they mean when they resort to rhetorical figures which they are fully \softline
capable of explaining clearly (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.10).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Polycletus, Athenian sculptor of the fifth century B.C., for Dante represented the height of \softline
classical Greek art.  Torraca (1905), in his gloss to vv. 32-33, points out that previous thirteenth-century Italian writers cited him in a similar way.  Sources of information about him were found in \softline
Cicero, Quintilian, and Pliny.  And Aristotle, mentioning him in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nichomachean Ethics}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
brought him to the attention of St. Thomas.  And so, even if Italian vernacular writers of this \softline
period had never seen his work, they could refer to it as Dante does here. Benvenuto (comm. to \softline
vv. 28-33) tells the interesting tale that he, in a private house in Florence, saw a marble statue of \softline
naked Venus that was supposed to have been done by Polycletus, but says that he does not \softline
believe it actually was, since, on the (erroneous) authority of Pliny, Polycletus worked in bronze, \softline
not in marble.  He adds that Dante really should have named Praxiteles here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first example of each virtue (here Humility), opposed to the capital vice \softline
purged on each of the seven terraces, is always Mary.  These four tercets are spare and central in \softline
their presentation of the Annunciation: only Gabriel and Mary are seen, minus the 'background' \softline
expected by any medieval reader, familiar with the iconography of this moment: dove, ray of light, \softline
garden, etc.  As the Ottimo (comm. to vv. 34-44) has it, the 'long-standing ban' had been in effect \softline
since the time recorded in Genesis 3 (the Fall) and was only rescinded when Christ harrowed hell.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The sculpted forms are so vivid that they actually seem to speak.  Thus does Dante recast \softline
the key spoken moments of Luke 1:26-38, Gabriel's charge and Mary's humble acceptance of it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As for a tradition of renditions of 'visible speech' in painting see Fengler and Stephany \softline
("The Visual Arts: A Basis for Dante's Imagery in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradise}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Michigan \softline
Academician}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 [1977]), p. 132: Simone Martini's Uffizi }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annunciation}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (1333 -- but reflecting a 
pre-existent tradition), where the angel's words are depicted on a horizontal line on the painting's \softline
gold background.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 22-54) make explicit what is almost said by many of \softline
those commentators who deal with the phrase in verse 53, 'varcai Virgilio' (I went past Virgil): it \softline
is a fine, realistic detail with no further significance.  Yet this entire passage, in which Virgil gets \softline
Dante to stop enjoying so deeply the representation of Gabriel and Mary and to make himself \softline
available to more of God's art, has certain overtones that might cast a different light on the \softline
relationship between the two poets here.  The Annunciation was nearly, we might reflect, the \softline
subject of Virgil's fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the child to be born to a virgin that, had he only known which \softline
child and which virgin, might have saved him.  It is this scene from which Virgil, in all innocence, \softline
pulls Dante away.  And, while what follows merely describes Dante's moving past Virgil, who had \softline
been standing between him and the first intaglio, from left to right, so as better to inspect the next \softline
work, it also describes physically what has a moral status, that is, Dante surpasses Virgil as an \softline
artist because he is more available to the meaning of God's art.  In this vein see Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's \softline
Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984]), p. 278.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has readied us to observe, Dante will now couple his subordinate \softline
exemplary figures as scriptural and classical, more specifically Old Testament and Roman.  This \softline
passage consolidates key elements of the narrative concerning David's bringing the Ark of the \softline
Covenant into Jerusalem: his dancing before it, his wife Michal's scorn, and her resultant \softline
barrenness (II Samuel 6:1-23).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 56-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Uzzah's presumption in attempting to assist Him who requires no help of any kind \softline
is related in II Samuel 6:6-7: he tried to steady the Ark when the movement of the oxen seemed \softline
about to topple it; for this God strikes him down immediately, killing him for his prideful \softline
insistence on a mission not enjoined.  For Dante's complex and amusing acknowledgment, both \softline
here and, more specifically, in his eleventh }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that he is, in some ways, the 'new Uzzah,' see \softline
Teodolinda Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine "Comedy": Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1992]), p. 132, and Hollander ("Dante as Uzzah? [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X 57 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI 9-12]," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sotto il segno di Dante: Scritti in onore di Francesco Mazzoni}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. L. Coglievina & D. \softline
De Robertis [Florence: Le Lettere, 1999], pp. 143-51).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 60-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist's ears assure him that the seven choirs in this panel are not \softline
singing, yet his eyes insist that they are.  Just so his nose smells no perfume of incense, while his \softline
eyes can }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 see}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that the smoke indeed has an aroma.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 65.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Perhaps no passage in a poem that refers to David more than to any other personage \softline
from the Old Testament (see Hollander, "Dante's Use of the Fiftieth Psalm," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  91 \softline
[1973], pp. 145-50) is more compelling in establishing the 'figural relationship' between the two \softline
poets.  Dante, too, is a 'humble psalmist,' David's modern counterpart.  It seems just to say that no \softline
one has developed this observation as well as has Barolini (see especially }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984], pp. 275-78).  In 1837 Tommaseo (comm. to vv. \softline
64-66) had dealt with this scene as a metaphor for great Dante's low vernacular poetry performed \softline
beneath the scornful gaze of pedantry: 'But Dante is more than poet in certain respects, because 
he does not fear to appear less than poet and dances with his robe hitched up; but princess Michal \softline
-- I might call her "pedantry" -- sniffs from the window.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Singleton, in his commentary to verse 75, cites a passage from Gregory the Great's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Moralia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  for David's humility: 'What is thought by others of his doings, I know not; I am more \softline
[amazed] at David dancing, than fighting.  For by fighting he subdued his enemies; but by dancing \softline
before the Lord he overcame himself.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Where David, down among the common people and dancing without kingly \softline
dignity, reflects the low comedic world, Michal, high above the crowd and separate from it, \softline
scornful, seems to represent the lofty, 'tragic,' or noble view.  David here serves as a forerunner \softline
for Jesus, who will identify himself with humility, while Michal seems to be associated with all \softline
those who resist humility in the name of pride.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The longest of these three scenes concerns Trajan, emperor of Rome in the years \softline
98-117.  Of those whom Dante depicts as being saved to whom all or most Christians would \softline
deny, or at least question, that status (Cato [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.75], Statius [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.73], Trajan [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XX.44], and Ripheus [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.68]), only for Trajan does there exist a tradition that considered \softline
him saved.  This result of St. Gregory's prayers is even allowed as possible by St. Thomas, in what \softline
seems an unusually latitudinarian gesture, recorded in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Summa theologica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (as was perhaps first \softline
noted by Lombardi [1791], comm. to vv. 74-75): }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ST}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III, Suppl., quaest. 71, art. 5, obj. 5 [for the \softline
text in English see Singleton's note to verse 75]).  That what seems to modern ears an \softline
unbelievable story should have had the support of so rigorous a thinker as Thomas still astounds \softline
readers.  Yet, if one looks closely, one sees that Thomas does hedge his bet: Trajan's salvation by \softline
Gregory's intervention is 'probable' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 potest probabiliter aestimari}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ); further, according to Thomas, \softline
'as others say' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 secundum quosdam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), Trajan may have only had his punishment put back until \softline
Judgment Day.  Dante betrays no such hesitation: the salvation of Trajan is Gregory's 'great \softline
victory' (verse 75).  Dante is in an enviable position, both possessing Thomas's support and being \softline
able to outdo him in enthusiasm.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For some of the many medieval texts that support the miraculous salvation of Trajan and \softline
for an array of possible sources for the dialogue between Trajan and the widow, including Trajan's \softline
column in Rome, see Nancy Vickers, "Seeing is Believing: Gregory, Trajan, and Dante's Art,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  \softline
Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  101 (1983), pp. 70-72, 75-79. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For Dante's reliance on two back-to-back parables in Luke (Luke 18:1-8; 18:9-14) see \softline
Vickers, pp. 73-75.  Lombardi (comm. to verse 32) was perhaps the first to apply Luke 18:14 \softline
('qui se exaltat humiliabitur, et qui se humiliat exaltabitur' [for every one that exalts himself shall \softline
be abased; and he that humbles himself shall be exalted]) to this scene.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the term }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stor{\f3 \'56}ata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Singleton (comm. to vv. 49-52): 'a depiction in art, even as \softline
stained-glass windows or initial letters in manuscripts or frescoed walls were said to be \softline
"historiated"' with historical or legendary material.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Saint Gregory, known as Gregory the Great, was pope from 590 to 604.  His lengthy \softline
commentary on the Book of Job (the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Moralia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), one of the most influential writings of the earlier \softline
middle ages, offers a different and happier understanding of Job's story than is prevalent today, \softline
insisting that it has a truly 'comic' resolution, rebinding Job to God and restoring his family.  Dante 
mentions Gregory twice, here and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX.106-117, in connection with the salvation of \softline
Trajan, and he is referred to in the last sphere of the heavens as one of the saved (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVIII.133), despite the fact that he had made small errors in listing the orders of the angelic \softline
hierarchy (as had Dante himself in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.v.6) in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Moralia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For information about which popes are saved and which are damned according to the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.46-48.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having been told of Gregory's 'great victory,' we are now told in what it consisted: \softline
the pope has saved a (dead) pagan emperor.  The way the text is handled reminds us of Dante's \softline
continuing hostility to the Church's insistence on the hierocrat position, in which the emperor is \softline
seen as totally dependent upon the Church for his authority.  Gregory's intervention for a great \softline
Roman emperor has, in Dante's eyes, a different style and sets a better standard.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 77-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The rapid strokes that fill in the details of this intaglio show that Dante is fully \softline
capable of producing the scene in pictures.  But in the following dozen verses, pushing the limits \softline
of the art he attributes to God, but which he has invented, he reports only the 'visible speech' \softline
wrought by what he saw, that is, the words induced by the carving rather than the carving itself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The exchange between the widow and Trajan, a sort of polite }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , involves six \softline
speeches.  The widow seeks, Trajan denies; she seeks again and is again denied; she appeals to \softline
Trajan's moral character and he accedes, touched in those two treasured Roman inner qualities, \softline
respect for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 iustitia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pietas}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Francesco da Buti (comm. to vv. 28-45) was of the opinion that, \softline
just as those who are prideful are so against their superiors, their equals, or their inferiors, so \softline
those who are humble may be so in the same relationships.  Thus Mary is humble before her \softline
superior, God; David before his equals, the priests; and Trajan before his inferior, the widow.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   What is new to Dante is not so to God (but this does not reduce the novelty or the \softline
excitement of it for Dante [see verse 104] or for us).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1969]), pp. 297-300, points out that this passage, with its 'speech made visible,' connects with two \softline
other similar moments in the poem, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.1-9 (the writing over the gate of hell) and \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.91-93 (the 'skywriting' in the heaven of Jupiter), and suggests that all of them \softline
may be thought of as representing 'visible speech,' as was suggested by one of his students, \softline
Gregory Curfman (Princeton '68).  Curfman also suggested that each passage was further related \softline
by containing a focal word, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giustizia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.4; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.93; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.91--now in Latin, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 iustitiam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) and then still further by involving Trajan.  This formulation works easily for the last two \softline
passages, but requires a contorted argument (along a path that travels through Hezekiah and \softline
Roman triumphal arches) to attach Trajan to the gate of hell.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Mestica was perhaps the first commentator to apply widely and frequently his perception \softline
of the significance of the term }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 visibile parlare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  for Dante's art (as compared with Virgil's) \softline
throughout the poem, beginning with the description of Charon in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.82-99: 'Comparing \softline
Charon as portrayed by Virgil and Dante quickly reveals the remarkable artistry used by the pupil \softline
when he imitated his teacher, as well as the originality and power of his style.  Virgil paints \softline
descriptively, employing ample displays of images and colors; Dante sculpts, using speech made \softline
visible.'  Mestica deploys the phrase fourteen more times in his commentary as he marvels at the 
power of Dante's art.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the program in the intaglios see H.D. Austin ("The Arrangement of Dante's \softline
Purgatorial Reliefs," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 PMLA}{\plain \fs24 \f1  47 [1932], pp. 1-9); for ekphrasis in this canto see James A.W. \softline
Heffernan (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Museum of Words: The Poetics of Ekphrasis from Homer to Ashbery}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Chicago: \softline
University of Chicago Press, 1993], pp. 37-45).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These images of humility reflect the pattern that we will find on each terrace: first \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 exempla}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the virtue that directly opposes the vice repented (here humility and pride), ultimately \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 exempla}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the vice itself (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.25-63).  Thus the penitents are at first encouraged and \softline
finally warned lest they backslide.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's delectation has delayed the travelers long enough so that even this slow-moving band of penitents, coming along behind them, can become visible to Virgil (but not to the \softline
art-absorbed Dante), even though the path was totally bare when the two poets arrived on it (vv. \softline
25-26).  It is a curious fact of this art-filled canto that, of the two poets, Virgil has clearly the \softline
shortest attention span to give to art.  He feels he has to urge Dante to take his eyes off Gabriel \softline
and Mary (verse 46) in order to examine David, and now interrupts Dante's delectation in the \softline
images of Trajan and the widow in order to get him to look at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 real}{\plain \fs24 \f1  souls.  (He is obviously \softline
himself not nearly so absorbed by God's art.)  It is a bit difficult to know what to make of these \softline
moments.  Virgil resembles the less art-responsive member of a couple in a museum, waiting for \softline
his friend, totally absorbed, to finish looking so that their tour may continue.  Further, the word \softline
used to describe Virgil's distracting locution is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mormorava}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (murmured).  Dante uses it seven other \softline
times in the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.86, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.37, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.47, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.37, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XX.19, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.26, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXV.21), and it usually denotes some form of less-than-clear speech, \softline
uttered in this way because the speaker is in pain or distracted (in the only preceding occurrence, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.86, it is the riven, speaking flame of Ulysses that murmurs).  For Dante to put together \softline
the very word that for him most stands for eloquence, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 poeta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , with 'murmured' is striking. The \softline
commentators are mainly silent in response to Virgil's murmuring.  Benvenuto (comm. to verse \softline
101), the only one before the twentieth century to pay the word significant notice, says this: \softline
Seeing Dante so rapt in aesthetic pleasure, Virgil interrupts him smilingly in a low voice to \softline
indicate that now his pupil can observe some }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 real}{\plain \fs24 \f1  purgation (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 aliam purgationem veram}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Torraca \softline
(comm. to verse 101) tries a different tack: Virgil murmurs because he is puzzled by the nature of \softline
these new things moving toward him.  Trucchi (comm. to verse 101) and Pietrobono (comm. to \softline
verse 101) suggest that the words are said by Virgil half to himself because he is absorbed in what \softline
he is seeing and afflicted by the problem of how to proceed in his guidance.  The last seems a \softline
reasonable explanation.  Yet no one has, with the exception of Vickers, paid attention to the \softline
curious and disturbing notion that Virgil, of all people, should murmur.  Here is her formulation, \softline
in partial response to that word: 'The placing of Virgil face to face with divine assurance of the \softline
salvation of Trajan, a man of no more faith than he, cannot but emphasize the enigma of Virgil's \softline
situation' (Nancy Vickers, "Seeing is Believing: Gregory, Trajan, and Dante's Art,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
101 [1983], p. 72).  She goes on to speculate that the salvation of Trajan by intervention of \softline
Gregory inevitably brings to mind another great medieval legend, that of St. Paul praying for the \softline
soul of Virgil at his tomb near Naples, a potential intervention on behalf of damned Virgil that, as \softline
far as everyone who has dealt with it is concerned, failed.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Vickers ("Seeing is Believing: Gregory, Trajan, and Dante's Art,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
101 [1983]), pp. 80-81, discusses Benvenuto's connecting the historiated walls of Carthage, with \softline
their account of the fall of Troy in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.453-495, and this scene, and then goes on to suggest \softline
that 'Aeneas is rapt in the esthetic experience and weeps; Dante the pilgrim is rapt and delights.  \softline
The one reads defeat (emptiness); the other triumphs (fullness).' \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's third address to us, his readers, is an appeal that we accept the necessity \softline
of treatment for our ills before we are eventually free of them.  Since the 'punishments' of the \softline
saved do not seem, at first blush, all that much more pleasant than the pains of the damned, the \softline
poet wishes to emphasize the great gulf that separates them: those in hell are eternal; these here \softline
are timebound and will cease at least by the Day of Judgment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This passage has caused much discussion but is in fact not as difficult as it has \softline
been made to seem.  The purpose of the entire passage is to get Dante to understand that what he \softline
is looking at is human and not merely a procession of mobile rocks.  Virgil says he, too, had \softline
trouble making this fact out at first, but eventually could see that there were beings moving \softline
beneath the rocks.  A single gesture makes this clear: they beat their breasts.  And it is a gesture \softline
that accords with the penitential feelings of the penitent prideful, as Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Scripture and Classical Authors in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 (1896)]), p. 49, \softline
clearly pointed out, citing Luke 18:13, where the publican beats his breast in humility.  \softline
Nonetheless, Ignazio Baldelli ("L'angariatissimo 'si picchia' / 'si nicchia' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ., X 120]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Filologia \softline
e critica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  15 [1990]), pp. 480-84, argues, against Petrocchi, for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 si nicchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (and not }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 si picchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  \softline
While he does not follow the path of those who argue for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nicchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as meaning 'lament' (a meaning \softline
that is found in the appearance of that verb in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.103) which, as Petrocchi says, is not a \softline
probable reading given that one is less likely to see than to hear lamentation, he does argue for the \softline
somewhat more recondite meaning of the verb, 'hides itself,' 'settles in its niche,' 'is in its nest,' etc.  \softline
While Baldelli's negative arguments against Petrocchi and others are sound, they are not \softline
eventually convincing because the action of the verb is too confining and slight to describe what \softline
we see, souls crushed down under the heavy weight of stone.  And thus the traditional reading, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 si \softline
picchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , i.e., beating themselves on their breasts, seems still the best.  Chiavacci Leonardi \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: Mondadori, 1994]), p. 310, suggests that it \softline
would be difficult to carry out this self-inflicted punishment beneath the heavy rocks and wants to \softline
return to the minority view found in Jacopo della Lana, namely, that these sinners are being \softline
beaten, castigated, by God.  Torraca (comm. to vv. 118-120) had already argued that, with their \softline
knees already pushed up against their chests, they would not have space to beat into (but this is \softline
said of the similetic figure of the man on a corbel, not of the penitents) and that they would have \softline
had to use their hands and arms to steady the weights upon their backs (but Dante never tells us \softline
that this is so; again, the nature of the place allows for phenomena that may not occur in the 'real \softline
world').  Just as it does not make sense to argue about whether or not the penitent prideful can \softline
see the exemplary figures displayed upon the mountain's side from under their stones if the wall on \softline
which these figures are shown is at right angles (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.23), it does not make \softline
sense here to argue that their arms and hands are not free to pummel their chests, as the poem is a \softline
poem and this space in it, like the entire mountain above the portal in the ninth canto, is a magic \softline
mountain, without always observing natural physical laws.  Thus the souls can see what needs to \softline
be seen and pummel themselves at will.  There is a useful summary of these arguments up to the 
twentieth century in Scartazzini (comm. to verse 120).  He argues forcefully for this reading.  \softline
Further confirmation comes from the likely citation of Luke (Luke 18:13), where the publican \softline
beats his breast, a text that has solid connections to this scene (see the last paragraph of the note \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.73-93).  Michele Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1934], pp. \softline
224-225) is on this side of the argument.  Further, Dante spends (and with any other hypothesis, \softline
wastes) five verses (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.115-119) having Virgil say how hard it is to make out this gesture \softline
but that, once you disentangle their bodies from the stones, you will see that they are human and \softline
not things.  Thus simple analysis of the content of the verses probably should have long ago \softline
disbarred any hypothesis that did not show how the human sign offered by the souls identified \softline
them as human.  The only hypothesis that meets this criterion is the most popular one, which also \softline
has iconography on its side.  See Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Scripture and Classical \softline
Authors in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 (1896)]), p. 49.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet's second apostrophe of the canto (see vv. 106-111 for the first) is not, \softline
strictly speaking, an address to the reader but rather a castigation of all those Christians (and thus, \softline
one would expect, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  all his readers) who have turned away from God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab One of the most celebrated metaphors of the poem, the 'angelic butterfly' that each of us \softline
has as a potential destiny, is what most of us will not become.  Hugh Shankland ("Dante 'Aliger,'" \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  70 [1975], pp. 764-85) suggests a relationship between Dante's name \softline
and the Latin word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 aliger}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (a Virgilian coinage, according to him, as a poetic alternative for \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alatus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), first used (at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.663) for Cupid, then again (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.249) for the 'winged flock' of \softline
waterfowl sent scrambling by Jove's golden eagle.  Guglielmo Gorni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lettera nome numero: \softline
L'ordine delle cose in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bologna: Il Mulino, 1990]), pp. 185-86, makes a similar \softline
observation, mistakenly believing that no one had proceeded him in doing so.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 128.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   While God wills that we, caterpillars that we are, become butterflies, Heaven-bound \softline
souls, we choose to be even less than those worms that are capable of that transformation, and \softline
have bent our wills to be such.  As commentators have shown, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 antomata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is Dante's version of \softline
Aristotle's creatures born, not of other creatures, but of the putrefaction of vegetable matter, as \softline
when the sun beats down on the mud -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De generatione animalium}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.1, as cited by \softline
Benvenuto, comm. to vv. 124-129).  See also Aristotle's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Historia animalium}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.19, as cited by \softline
Pasquini/Quaglio (comm. to vv. 128-129), where Aristotle distinguishes, as Dante does here, \softline
between worms that can turn into butterflies and those, defective, which cannot.  The meaning \softline
clearly seems to be that we are born worms, but turn ourselves into still lesser beings, formally \softline
imperfect worms, as though we had not been bred by creatures with rational souls.  Benvenuto \softline
concludes by quoting Job (but actually the Psalms [21:7 (22:6)]): 'Vermis sum ego et non homo' \softline
(I am a worm, not a man).  He may have conflated that passage with Job 25:6.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In a canto so concerned with art, and highly mimetic art in particular, it seems \softline
only natural that the poet would have wanted to conclude with a simile, one of this artisan's \softline
specialties.  We may be surprised to realize that this is the first one in this canto, that we have not \softline
seen one since well back in the last canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.34-42).  A corbel is a sculpted human figure, \softline
often crudely realistic, and thus part of the low-mimetic tradition, used to decorate the element \softline
that joins a weight-bearing column to the roof- or floor-beam that it supports.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The notion that an artifact can be so 'realistic' that, although it is not real, but a fiction, as 
it were, it can cause an observer real distress, continues the mimetic concern so evident in this \softline
canto and also stands as a sort of emblem of the poem as a whole, with its insistence on its literal \softline
truth dizzyingly countered by its less evident but clear admission that it is in fact invented by a \softline
poet, if one who will only write fictions that seem (and claim) to be utterly true.  For discussion of \softline
this passage in this light see Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine "Comedy": Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: \softline
Princeton University Press, 1992]), pp. 125-26.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136-137.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We learn that, just as in hell there were sinners punished in differing degrees for \softline
the same sin, so in purging themselves penitents also reflect the degree of their former sinfulness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A small but continuing dispute in the commentaries debates whether }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 paz{\f3 \'56}enza}{\plain \fs24 \f1  should \softline
be interpreted as 'suffering' or 'patience.'  Philologically there is probably no advantage to either \softline
solution.  However, poetic logic points to a simple explanation (one shared by the vast majority of \softline
the commentators): what we face here is a relation of paradox rather than similarity.  Even the \softline
most stoical of the sinners seemed to be expressing the thought (another case of 'speech made \softline
visible') 'I can no more.'  Of course the one who suffered most would be saying such a thing; that \softline
would not be worth mentioning.  The point is that even the penitent least crushed by the weight of \softline
his former pride is suffering as much as one can possibly suffer.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Gerard Manley Hopkins offered, whether he wished to or not, a perfectly Dantean gloss to \softline
this verse.  In his 'terrible sonnet' named 'Carrion Comfort' by Robert Bridges, Hopkins, more \softline
likely citing Shakespeare's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Antony and Cleopatra}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.xv.59) than Dante, has his speaking voice \softline
cry out, 'Not, I'll not... cry }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 I can no more}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  I can.'  While Antony says 'I can no more' and dies, \softline
Hopkins' persona does not give in to despair and continues to strive toward God.  Here, the \softline
penitents all seem to insist that they are at the end of their strength, yet all continue on the road \softline
toward making restitution to God by giving satisfaction for their sins and thus eventually obtain \softline
their final absolution.\par
}}