{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 27}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-5.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's simile here, perfect in form, masks its formal vacuity: 'as is the sun in a \softline
certain position, so was it then' (e.g., 'as a commentator shakes his head in complaint, so did he \softline
shake his head').  Dante enjoys using this sort of comparison.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.136-141, in which reference is made to the study of this phenomenon (sometimes referred to as 'false \softline
simile' or as 'pseudo-simile') by Eric Mallin ("The False Simile in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  102 [1984], pp. 15-36).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Using his usual four coordinates, each 90}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  apart from the next (Jerusalem, Spain , India, \softline
the antipodes), Dante, like clocks on the wall in an air terminal, tells us the global condition of the \softline
time.  It is 6pm now on the mountain.  At the start of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  a similar passage described \softline
dawn (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.1-9), with the sun's position with regard to all these coordinates 180}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  distant from \softline
where it is now.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The river Ebro in Spain is now beneath the constellation Libra, i.e., it is midnight in \softline
Spain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In Dante the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nona}{\plain \fs24 \f1  usually refers to the ninth hour of the day, i.e., 3pm.  Here it is \softline
used to mean 'noon.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 6-8.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The angel of Chastity, standing outside the flames along the far edge of the terrace, \softline
intones part of the sixth Beatitude (Matthew 5:8), 'Bless{\f3 \'50}d are the clean of heart [for they shall \softline
see God].'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This angel has a unique function, since he, like the warder at the gate below, \softline
supervises a border beyond which purgation is not performed; however, unlike the warder, he \softline
functions within the territory of his terrace and his task is not replicated by an angel on any other \softline
terrace.  He supervises what seems to be a form of final expiation and acceptance that mirrors \softline
Christ's baptism by fire (Matthew 3:11), as promised by John the Baptist: the Lord whom he \softline
serves will baptize 'with the Holy Ghost and with fire.'  Absent as far as one can tell from the \softline
commentary tradition, this citation was suggested by an undergraduate at Princeton (Joseph \softline
Taylor '70) many years ago.  The angel seems to be addressing 'bless{\f3 \'50}d souls,' \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 whether }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 in re}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Statius) or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 in potentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Dante); Virgil, of course, is excluded from blessedness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Trucchi (comm. to vv. 10-15) observes that this angel seems to be working in \softline
collaboration with a second one (the voice that sings from beyond the fire to draw the finally fully \softline
penitent souls to their new lives in grace), we find on this terrace, uniquely, two angels.  See the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.55-57.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Most recent commentators believe that Dante here refers to a corpse being laid in \softline
a grave, i.e., he felt as dead as a man being placed in his grave (i.e., 'I became so terrified that I \softline
looked like a dead man': Benvenuto's reading (comm. to vv. 7-15).  Others, beginning with \softline
Lombardi (comm. to verse 15), argue that this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fossa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (pit, grave [it can mean either; in its last \softline
appearance at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.121 it meant 'grave']) refers to the deeper and narrower pit that is used \softline
to bury a criminal alive and to which Dante has earlier referred (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.46-47).  However, this \softline
form of punishment, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 propagginazione,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  involves suffocating a criminal by covering him with earth 
after he has been placed upside down in a pit, a posture that does not seem germane to this \softline
passage.  Perhaps for this reason most (but not all) recent discussants read the line as we do.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Exactly what Dante's physical posture here is has been variously understood.  \softline
Bosco/Reggio (comm. to this verse) review a number of these discussions and make the sensible \softline
suggestion that Dante is holding his hands toward the fire, feeling its heat on them and attempting \softline
to keep the rest of his body as far as possible from the flame behind those extended hands, while \softline
he bends his head toward it, peering into it.  Those who argue that Dante has joined his hands do \softline
not deal with the fact that the other three times in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  when he uses a form of this past \softline
participle of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 commettere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (to commit) it never means 'join together,' as most take it to mean here.  \softline
(See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.62 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.47, as well as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.57.)  In other words, he has 'committed' his \softline
hands to the fire, i.e., stretched them out toward it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 17-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The currently most favored reading of these lines is already found in Tozer \softline
(comm. to vv. 16-18): 'Burning was a mode of punishment at Florence at this period, and Dante \softline
himself had been condemned to be burnt alive at the time of his banishment.'  In short, Dante, \softline
having seen human beings burned alive in the public square, and having been promised exactly \softline
such treatment should he ever attempt to return to Florence from his exile, is understandably \softline
frozen by fear.  For him, a man in the flesh, the danger of the fire seems, naturally enough, far \softline
greater than it must have to those who were there in spirit only.  They, to be sure, suffer mental \softline
anguish as they purge their sin of lust in the flames; Dante understandably imagines that the fire \softline
will work quite differently upon him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   If it is Virgil who speaks, the narrator again reminds us of Statius's continuing \softline
presence, even though he has not spoken since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.108, when he finished his lecture \softline
on the aerial body.  He will, in fact, not speak again, though his actions and presence will be \softline
recorded until a few lines from the end of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.135).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 21-23.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil is at pains to remind Dante that here in purgatory the dangers are not those \softline
encountered in hell.  He will not perish in these flames, while he might have been destroyed by \softline
Geryon's envenomed tail or by falling from his back (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII.83-84, 95-96, 121).  And so, \softline
Virgil asks, if Dante could trust him then, how much more can he trust him now?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Luke 21:18: 'Yet not a hair on your head shall perish.'  Jesus is speaking of the \softline
terrible time of tribulation that awaits his followers, which they shall nonetheless survive.  \softline
Scartazzini (comm. to verse 27) also cites Paul's words to his followers, terrified in a storm at sea \softline
(Acts 27:34): 'For not a hair shall fall from the head of any of you.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil, having failed to convince Dante even a little, now resorts to scientific \softline
experiment, asking him to test a hem of his clothing in this spiritual fire.  As Torraca (comm. to \softline
vv. 29-30) pointed out, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 far credenza}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (perform a test), was a phrase (found in the second book of \softline
Boccaccio's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Filocolo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) used for the practice of having a prince's (or other important person's) food \softline
sampled by animals or by servants, expressly charged with this task, to be sure it had not been \softline
poisoned.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In a wonderfully wrought sequence, Virgil has given, rapid-fire, a series of convincing \softline
proposals and arguments, along with a concluding volley of encouragement (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.20-32).  The poet's description of the protagonist, in a single line, Dante's version of 'the soul indeed \softline
is willing but the flesh is weak' (Matthew 26:41), shows that he is now as reluctant as he has ever \softline
been: 'against my will, I stood stock still.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Whatever else it accomplishes, the little scene again shows how amusing Dante can be.  \softline
Glauco Cambon ("Il sorriso purgatoriale: umorismo dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Atti dell'Istituto Veneto di \softline
Scienze, Lettere ed Arti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  140 [1981-82], pp. 89-103) tried to remind us of that.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In Ovid's story (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.55-166), the myth that accounts for why the fruit of \softline
the mulberry tree is red, Pyramus and Thisbe are neighbors in the Babylon of Queen Semiramis \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.58).  They are in love.  Since their parents forbid them to marry, they speak to one \softline
another lovingly through a little gap in the common wall of their houses.  They conspire to meet \softline
one night at the tomb of Ninus, the dead king, former husband of Semiramis.  Thisbe arrives first \softline
but, as luck would have it, a lioness, fresh from the kill and covered in the blood of the cattle she \softline
had slain, seeking a fountain to slake her thirst, frightened Thisbe away.  The beast, returning \softline
from her drink and finding the cloak that fleeing Thisbe had dropped on the ground, soils that \softline
garment with her bloody maw.  Pyramus, arriving late for his assignation, finds the bloodied cloth \softline
and assumes the worst.  Blaming himself for Thisbe's putative death, he kills himself with his \softline
sword.  His spurting blood colors the white fruit of the mulberry red.  Returning, Thisbe finds the \softline
body of her beloved.  In anguish she calls out his name and her own, and he opens his eyes and \softline
recognizes her just before he dies.  In turn, she uses the sword of Pyramus to take her own life.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The simile that Dante contrives from this material gives the name of Beatrice the same role \softline
as that of Thisbe.  Virgil speaks her name just as Thisbe had spoken her own.  In Dante's case it \softline
revives the will to continue toward salvation in a lover who has felt he was at the verge of death, \softline
while in the case of Pyramus there is no larger sense of redemption, only a moment of tragic \softline
recognition.  Why does Dante construct this similetic moment out of such antithetic material?  His \softline
love for Beatrice leads to life, Pyramus's love for Thisbe, to death.  When we hear Dante's name \softline
on the lips of Beatrice (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.55), we are in a better position to see the complex relations \softline
between these two acts of naming here and two kinds of love.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab On the relations between the mulberry and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil \softline
from which Eve and then Adam ate, as well as the cross on which Christ died and hung like \softline
bloodied fruit, see Christian Moevs ("Pyramus at the Mulberry Tree: De-petrifying Dante's Tinted \softline
Mind," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Imagining Heaven in the Middle Ages: A Book of Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Jan Swango Emerson \softline
and Hugh Feiss [New York: Garland, 2000]), pp. 218-19.  Francis Fergusson (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Drama of \softline
the Mind}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1953]), p. 167, makes a case for the importance \softline
of the reference to Christ's blood in line 2 of the opening simile of the canto to this later motif.  \softline
And see Moevs (p. 229) for a potential citation here of a passage in Augustine's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De ordine}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.3), \softline
when the still unconverted catechumen is angered when he hears a young poet named \softline
(appropriately enough) Licentius reciting a poem about Pyramus and Thisbe.  Licentius, \softline
Augustine says, may be 'erecting between [himself] and reality a wall more impenetrable than [the \softline
one his verses] are trying to rear between the lovers.'  For Pyramus and Thisbe in the tradition of \softline
Romance vernacular prior to Dante see Gianfranco Contini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Un' idea di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: Einaudi, \softline
1976]), pp. 185-87; for a consideration of six medieval Latin poems presenting Ovid's ill-fated \softline
lovers for the delectation and instruction of schoolboys see Robert Glendinning ("Pyramus and 
Thisbe in the Medieval Classroom," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Speculum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  61 [1986], pp. 51-78).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a passage from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.xii.16), relevant here also as an indication of Virgil's \softline
pleasure in regaining his role as Dante's teacher and guide, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.106-111.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 47-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We had previously known that Dante was following the two other poets (see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.16-18) and now we learn that Statius has been nearest him, with Virgil in the lead.  \softline
As Bosco/Reggio point out (comm. to verse 47), Virgil's tactic here is reminiscent of his staying \softline
behind Dante to protect him from Geryon's sting (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII.83-84).  Here, however, one might \softline
add, Virgil is not worried about protecting Dante, but by the possibility that he would try to flee \softline
back through the flames.  And thus Statius is deployed as a rearguard, not against any enemy, but \softline
against the questionable will of the protagonist.  Further, Virgil, by making Dante come closer, \softline
arranges things so that it is easier to control him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 53.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   While one wants to be cautious about such things, Virgil's naming of Beatrice here \softline
represents the ninth time that her name has appeared in the poem and the last time before she \softline
names herself (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.73).  Since Dante likes to use the rhythm of 9 + 1 to represent the \softline
movement from good to best (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : nine appearances of Beatrice to Dante on earth, in one \softline
form or another, surmounted by a tenth and heavenly vision; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : nine heavenly spheres \softline
surmounted by the perfection of the Empyrean [see Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita Nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Dante's Perceptions \softline
of Beatrice,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  92 [1974], pp. 1-18)]), it is at least conceivable that there is such a \softline
program at work for the appearances of the names of Beatrice in this part of the poem.  As \softline
Frederick Locke ("Dante's Miraculous Enneads," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  85 [1967], pp. 59-70) pointed \softline
out, Beatrice's name appears 63 times in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and that number is a 'nine' (6 + 3 = 9).  It is \softline
possible that Dante was counting his uses of her name and deliberately chose to have it appear \softline
exactly nine times before she revealed herself to Dante.  The pattern would have been more \softline
pleasing had Virgil spoken that name each of those nine times; however, once it is Dante himself \softline
who speaks it, in his conversation with Forese.  Beatrice's name appears as follows in the first \softline
sixty-three cantos of the poem: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.70, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.103, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.46, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.77, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.48, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.73, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.128 (spoken by Dante), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.36, and here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil will probably not see those eyes, since he will be dismissed from the poem just \softline
as Beatrice appears (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.49), even though he had been subjected to the heat of the \softline
fire when he guided Dante through it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The scene we expect, as the protagonist completes his ritual purging on a terrace, \softline
is the removal of one (in this case the seventh and last) P from his forehead.  Apparently the poet \softline
decided to avoid representing this climactic moment, allowing it either to be intrinsic, or else \softline
perhaps allowing us to believe that the fire itself cleansed the protagonist of his predisposition \softline
toward lust.  But this is the moment (not before the entrance to the fire, as some believe) at which \softline
the ritual act should be performed, just before the upward movement to the next area of the \softline
mountain, as it has been on the other terraces (see an associated discussion of the angels' \softline
recitations of the Beatitudes in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.38-39).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Trucchi (comm. to vv. 10-15) counts the angels who serve God's ends in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and 
comes up with ten (the 'perfect number,' as he remarks): the Christian Mercury who brings the \softline
living dead to the mountain (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.43), the angelic warder at the gate (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.104), the seven \softline
who are associated with the virtues opposed to the vices repented at the end of the experience of \softline
each terrace, and now this one.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This final angel of purgatory (in paradise we see Gabriel circling the Virgin [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXIII.103] and then the angelic hierarchy in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII) acts as a sort of positive Siren, \softline
drawing souls away from lust and setting them free.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As, among the early commentators, only he who speaks from the pages of the Codice \softline
Cassinese pointed out, the passage reflects the words that Christ will speak to the just at the Day \softline
of Judgment: 'Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, "Come, bless{\f3 \'50}d of my Father, \softline
take possession of the kingdom prepared for you from the [time of the] foundation of the world"' \softline
(Matthew 25:34).  In the twentieth century notice began again to be paid to this absolutely \softline
relevant text.  As Singleton reports (comm. to this verse), Ernest Hatch Wilkins ("Dante and the \softline
Mosaics of his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Bel San Giovanni}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Speculum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1927]), p. 5, pointed out that a mosaic in the \softline
Florentine Baptistery showed a gate guarded by an angel who welcomes a newly arrived soul, \softline
while a second angel leads a group of the saved and carries a banner that is inscribed 'Come, \softline
bless{\f3 \'50}d of my Father, possess what has been prepared.'  Dante's second and singing angel would \softline
certainly seem to be modeled on that second angel and his words.  And that there are two angels \softline
on this terrace may reflect his memory of the mosaic.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The angel's words, as many now note, are a sort of paraphrase of John 12:35: \softline
'Walk while you have the light, that darkness may not overtake you.'  Poletto (comm. to this \softline
verse) seems to have been the first commentator to notice the correlation.  That it should have \softline
waited so long to be observed is comprehensible, since it is not a literal citation so much as a \softline
recasting of John's thought.  This second angel, exactly like the first on this terrace, first speaks in \softline
Latin and then in the vernacular.  See, again, the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.38-39.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 65-66) point out that, since this stair runs from due \softline
west to due east and since at the outset of the ascent (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.16-18) Dante had his back to the \softline
east, he has now gone exactly halfway around the mountain's circumference or 180}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o }{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Naturally \softline
the actual circumference keeps decreasing as the mountain goes higher, like that of a snail's shell.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 levare i saggi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (tried) suggests a literal sense of taking a sample of \softline
rock, as in geological studies.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's playfulness is for some reason particularly evident in his similes, which \softline
often and deliberately have 'something wrong' in them, incomplete grammatical relations, mixtures \softline
of styles, and other apparent 'defects.'  Here, on the other hand, we have a perfectly developed \softline
and complex 'classical' simile: 'Just as... and just as... so.'  Anyone examining the passage closely is \softline
likely to perceive that there are things 'wrong' here as well.  Let us consider the components of the \softline
simile:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \ul\f1 Dante (singular)\ul0 \tab \ul \ul0 \tab \ul Virgil and Statius (plural)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 76-81\ul0 \tab goats (plural)\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab shepherd (singular)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 82-84\ul0 \tab flock (plural)\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab herdsman (singular)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 85-87\ul0 \tab goat (singular)\ul0 \tab shepherds (plural)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Several things are worth remarking.  This simile is mainly unadulterated vernacular pastoral with a \softline
few Latinate words (and perhaps a phrase from Virgil at line 77 from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.10, according \softline
to Daniello [comm. to vv. 76-81] and many of those who followed him).  But why does Dante not \softline
get his singulars and plurals straight in the first two elements, only to correct them in the third?  \softline
Why does he include the second element at all, since he excludes it from his summarizing and \softline
concluding third element?  And why, as Torraca (comm. to vv. 76-78) wondered, is the shepherd \softline
standing up (if leaning on his stick) while Virgil and Statius are lying down?  Is that why, Torraca \softline
continued to wonder, Dante included the second element, in which the herdsman is at least closer \softline
to lying down?  The purpose of these questions is to focus attention on how much Dante expects \softline
of his reader.  These little touches, reminding us of his artistic freedom, make us aware of that.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 77.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rapide e proterve}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in verse 77 (which we have translated as 'quick and \softline
reckless'), according to some commentators, beginning with Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 76-87), \softline
means 'rapaces et temerariae' (rapacious and bold).  Others have objected to the first of these \softline
terms, more fitting to the description of the appetite of a wolf, as being inapplicable to goats.  On \softline
the other hand, if we understood the word to mean 'voracious,' there would be no such problem.  \softline
We, however, believe that Dante is referring to the way a free-roaming goat moves, rather than to \softline
the way it eats, but have no quarrel with those who follow Benvenuto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 89-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The stars look bigger and brighter because Dante is higher up and closer to them \softline
than he has ever been in his life.  There may be a moral atmosphere at work here as well, in that \softline
he has lost the obscuring mantle of sin that is our normal lot (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.3), and that also \softline
would make them seem brighter.  For exactly such a twofold understanding see John of Serravalle \softline
(comm. to vv. 88-90).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is now before dawn on Wednesday morning, the last day on the mountain, from \softline
which Dante will depart at noon.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 'Cytherea' is a proper noun formed from the epithet used of the 'maritime' Venus, the \softline
lustful goddess born of the spume of the sea near the island Cythera.  Dante here presents her as \softline
morning star, as she was seen at the opening of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   However, and as has been pointed \softline
out in recent years with increasing insistence, in 1300 Venus was the evening star at this period of \softline
the year, and the morning star only in 1301.  See the discussion in Graziella Federici Vescovini \softline
("Dante e l'astronomia del suo tempo," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [2002]), pp. 292, 300n., who \softline
resists the temptation to 'redate' the poem to 1301, believing that Dante is merely taking \softline
advantage of poetic license.  And see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.19-21.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the formulaic nature of Dante's preparation of his three dream narratives in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), \softline
p. 149.  All the dreams are preceded by 'an astronomical reference to the hour of the morning at \softline
which the dream occurs' and then by the distinct vocabulary of dream vision, as in the second of 
these tercets: 'in sogno mi parea / donna vedere' (in a dream I seemed to see a lady).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The dream of Leah and Rachel is the most transparent of the three dreams in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.13-33 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.1-33).  Leah and Rachel, the daughters of Laban \softline
in Genesis, were understood by Christian interpreters to represent, respectively, the active life and \softline
the contemplative life (and thus Rachel's staring into the mirror is not to be taken as narcissistic \softline
self-admiration but contemplation in a positive sense).  It is clear that Dante is making use of that \softline
tradition here.  However, he is also making use of biblical typology in his treatment of Leah, who \softline
is related to Eve in her as yet unfallen condition in that she is doing what Adam and Eve were told \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 to do, 'ut }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 operaretur}{\plain \fs24 \f1  et custodiret illum' (to dress [the garden] and keep it -- Genesis 2:15).  \softline
Dante's verb in the last line of Leah's speech, which concludes the dream, remembers the biblical \softline
verb in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ovrare}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the working in this garden that points back to the tasks of that one before the \softline
Fall (see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1969], p. 153).  For the balanced relationships between the pair Leah and Rachel and a second \softline
pair, Matelda and Beatrice, the two central female presences in the earthly paradise, see Paola \softline
Pacchioni ("Lia e Rachele, Matelda e Beatrice," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  18 [2001], pp. 47-74).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is probably also fair to say that the text intrinsically presents Dante as a new Jacob: 'As \softline
Jacob toiled for seven years in order to gain the hand of Rachel, only to be given that of Leah \softline
(Genesis 29:10f.), so Dante has toiled up seven terraces of purgation with the promise of \softline
Beatrice, only to find Matelda' (Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: \softline
Princeton University Press, 1969], pp. 151-52).  Giovanni Pascoli (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La mirabile visione}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bologna: \softline
Zanichelli, 1923 (1902)]), p. 462, had much earlier suggested that Dante, 'the new Aeneas,' was \softline
also the 'new Jacob.'  Pascoli was followed, without their apparent knowledge, by Singleton \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)]), p. 108, and by T. K. \softline
Swing (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Fragile Leaves of the Sibyl}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Westminster: The Newman Press, 1962]), p. 95.  The \softline
Italian tradition has for a long time insisted only on the 'allegorical' equation here, Leah as the \softline
active life, Rachel as the contemplative.  A figural understanding (i.e., one developed from \softline
'historical allegory,' as in the interpretation of the Bible itself), has mainly been absent.  But see \softline
Momigliano (comm. to these verses) who almost resolves the problem in this way.  Bosco/Reggio \softline
(comm. to vv. 91-108) offer a long and confessedly 'perplexed' attempt to account for the \softline
resulting supposedly double (and thus inadmissible) valence of Beatrice as both 'theology' and 'the \softline
contemplative life.'  For another reading of this dream see Zygmunt Baranski ("Dante's Three \softline
Reflective Dreams," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 [1989]), pp. 219-24.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 110-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Awakening, the protagonist (and Statius, but Virgil only problematically so) is \softline
associated with travelers who are getting nearer home.  It is quite clear that 'home' now is at the \softline
very least the garden of Eden, and perhaps the true paradise that lies above.  There are no \softline
thoughts of Florence here.  In these lines the true pilgrimage becomes a journey from God, into \softline
the world, and back to God.  It is interesting to compare the beautiful and sad opening of the \softline
eighth canto of this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , with its traveler whose thoughts are on friends left behind in the \softline
world.  This pilgrim/traveler has apparently learned a good deal on the mountain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the resonance of a phrase found in the Song of Songs in this verse, 'le tenebre \softline
fuggian da tutti lati' (the shadows all around were being put to flight): 'Donec aspiret dies et \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 inclinentur umbrae' }{\plain \fs24 \f1 (Until the day break and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 the shadows flee away)}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Cant. 2:17 and 4:6), see 
Eleanor Cook ("Scripture as Enigma: Biblical Allusion in Dante's Earthly Paradise," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  117 [1999]), p. 5.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 122-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is as close as the poet comes to telling us that the protagonist's last P has \softline
been removed.  He feels as light as his 'feathers.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 125.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Since the garden of Eden seems to be just slightly below the level to which the \softline
travelers have now climbed (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.4), this topmost step of the stair is the highest \softline
point on earth attained by Dante, and by Virgil as well, but he has no further rising to do.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-142.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's final speech in the poem may be clarified by a summarizing paraphrase.  \softline
(1) I have brought you, with intellect and skill, through flames temporal (purgatory) and eternal \softline
(hell) and have reached the limit of my powers; (2) from now on follow your own inclination as \softline
your guide, since you are free; (3) see the sun and the freely growing vegetation here; until \softline
Beatrice, whose weeping eyes sent me to you, comes glad-eyed into your presence, you may \softline
choose to sit or wander; (4) no more do I speak or gesture; your will is free, upright, and whole; \softline
do its pleasure -- and thus do I crown and miter you over yourself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beginning with Scartazzini (comm. to this verse), commentators have cited St. \softline
Thomas to the effect that the pains of the damned are eternal while the fire of purgatory is \softline
temporary.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 131.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   If Dante's will is as good as Virgil will shortly say it is, he can take pleasure as his \softline
guide because he will only want that which reason will want.  Nothing sinful would any longer \softline
tempt him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The self-sufficient nature of the vegetation of the garden will be insisted on at \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.109-120.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is perhaps useful to consider an attempt to see how the poem may be divided \softline
into four large units, as follows:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \ul\f1 Dante's development}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \ul\f1 locus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \ul\f1 \ul0 \tab \ul guide}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}\pard \fs24\fi-6480\li6480\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 I.\ul0 \tab correction of the will\ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 \ul0 \tab Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I-XXXIV\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab Virgil\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-6480\li6480\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 II.\ul0 \tab perfection of the will\ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 \ul0 \tab Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I-XXIX\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab Virgil\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-720\li720\tx720 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 III. \ul0 \tab correction of the intellect\ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX-}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX\ul0 \tab Beatrice\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 IV.\ul0 \tab perfection of the intellect\ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX-end\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab Bernard\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 See Hollander ("The Invocations of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Yearbook of Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1976], pp. \softline
235-40).  And for the possible contribution of St. Bernard to this schema, see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.127-132.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is at this moment that Virgil gives over the instructional task that has been his since \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I, presiding over the correction and perfection of Dante's will.  A less developed version \softline
of this schema is found in Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
1967 (1958)]), pp. 11-12, where Virgil is seen as leading Dante to 'a condition of rectitude in the \softline
will,' while the goal to which Beatrice leads him 'is one in which intellect is primary.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The precise meaning and reference of this concluding verse has been the subject of \softline
much discussion.  The meta-literary sense that he has of the canto as a whole leads Picone \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII: passaggio rituale e }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 translatio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  poetica," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1987]), pp. \softline
400-1, to allegorize the crown and miter that Virgil awards Dante as (1) the triumphant laurel of \softline
the modern poet and (2) the Christian truth that he can add to Virgil's store of pagan wisdom and \softline
poetic technique.  As Remo Fasani ("Canto XXVII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), p. 432, points out, \softline
although the modern discussion has tended to treat the terms as synonyms, as long ago as in the \softline
commentaries of the Ottimo (comm. to vv. 139-142) and of Francesco da Buti (comm. to vv. \softline
124-142), they were understood as separate entities.  To the Ottimo they signified 'rector and \softline
shepherd'; to Francesco, laurel crown ('}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 corono}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; di laurea, come poeta') and bishop's miter ('come \softline
vescovo e guidatore dell'anima tua a l'eterna salute' [as bishop and guide over your own soul, \softline
bound for eternal salvation]), two very different sorts of adornment for Dante's head.  Fasani opts \softline
for the crown as sign of Dante's active life, his temporal (and decidedly imperial) political mission, \softline
and sees the miter as an image of his contemplative life, the poet's spiritual mission.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In the recent and continuing argument there are those who argue, as did Contini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Un' idea \softline
di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: Einaudi, 1976]), pp. 188-89, citing Scartazzini (comm. to this verse) who had \softline
come upon a description of the coronation of the emperor Otto IV in 1209 in which he was \softline
crowned }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 and}{\plain \fs24 \f1  mitered in a study by one Father Ponta, collected in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Opere su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , published \softline
in 1845, pp. 189 and 193, that for Virgil to grant ecclesiastical authority is totally foreign to \softline
anything we have read in this poem.  In an entirely similar mode, Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)]), pp. 64-69, cites (not Ponta or Scartazzini \softline
or Contini) Ernst Kantorowicz (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The King's Two Bodies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1957]), pp. 491-92, for the use of the miter in the crowning of the temporal ruler.  This series of \softline
interesting attempts to make Virgil's last words in the poem tautological does, however, leave one \softline
less than easily convinced; the word 'miter' is removed from an ecclesiastical context only with \softline
difficulty.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Virgil can make Dante neither an emperor nor a bishop (and surely not a pope).  He is \softline
metaphorically crowning Dante for now having, in his will, the ability to rule himself morally, as \softline
the world, were it only better governed, would be ruled by two powers, emperor and pope.  \softline
Dante is now said by Virgil to be in complete command of the powers of his will, a microcosmic \softline
image of the world made just (improbable as Dante would have thought such a happy state) under \softline
its two prime authorities.\par
}}