{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 18}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This canto continues the flow of the last with no demarcation in the text itself of a \softline
terminus or of a new beginning.  As Bosco points out in his introductory note to the two cantos, \softline
they form a unit developed on a chiastic pattern:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}\pard \fs24\fi-2160\li2160\tx720\tx1440\tx2160 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XVII.1-69    \ul0 \tab (narrative)\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \par
}\pard \fs24\fi-5760\li5760\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab XVII.70-139 \ul0 \tab (instruction)\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-5760\li5760\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab XVIII.1-75  \ul0 \tab (instruction)\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XVIII.76-145 (narrative)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Further, these two cantos form a larger unit with }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI, which is similarly divided into \softline
two large blocks of material: 1-63 (narrative) and 64-145 (Marco's instruction).  In this way the \softline
numerical center of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , cantos 49-51, is made more noticeable.  (For the midpoint \softline
with respect to the number of lines in the poem, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.118-119.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Pier Giorgio Ricci ("Il Canto XVIII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV \softline
[Florence: Le Monnier, 1970]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), p. 252, suggests that Dante spreads Virgil's full canto's worth \softline
(145 verses) of speechifying over two cantos so as not to strain the reader's patience.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 2-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's 'Scholastic' credentials seem strong.  See Giuseppe Tarozzi's appreciation (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il \softline
canto XVIII del "Purgatorio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ["Lectura Dantis Orsanmichele"] [Florence: Sansoni, 1901]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), p. 7: \softline
Virgil 'here represents the idealized figure of the medieval docent.'  A close analysis of his \softline
discourse in the preceding canto, such as may be found, in English, in Singleton's commentary, \softline
reveals a line of argument that is closely based on Thomistic texts.  In keeping with such discourse \softline
and for the first time since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI.48, Virgil is saluted by his pupil as 'professor' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dottore}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  \softline
For the other terms used to describe Virgil's role as guide in the poem, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
II.140.  (Virgil is referred to as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dottore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  elsewhere as follows: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf. }{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.70, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf. }{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.123, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf. }{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI.13, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf. }{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI.48, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.22, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.131, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.14).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In fact, Virgil has rarely been referred to or addressed by Dante with such fervent \softline
admiration as here and shortly later in this canto, when he will be 'padre verace' (true father  --  7), \softline
'Maestro' (Master -- 10), and then 'father' again (13).  See the note to vv. 17-18.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In this and the next canto the protagonist's forward movement in understanding is \softline
underlined by the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nuovo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (new): used here for his new 'thirst,' at verse 141 for his 'new \softline
thought' in reaction to the departure of the penitents in Sloth, and at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.56, in his \softline
reference to the new dream he has just had on this terrace.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8.}{\plain \fs24 \f1    Dante's 'timid wish' should probably be considered related to intellectual sloth (see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.130, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lento amore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [laggard love]).  How could Dante have considered himself 'timid' \softline
in seeking the truth?  Had he involved himself in a less than urgent affection for the good, the \softline
charge would seem appropriate.  Since it is the author who makes the charge, it might seem that \softline
he himself believed that he did not always display the zeal necessary for loving well.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Why, one might ask, after Virgil's long speech in the last canto, should Dante want \softline
Virgil to 'expound' love when he seems just now to have finished (with suitable fanfare) doing 
precisely that?  What the protagonist means is 'expatiate upon,' 'explain more precisely,' the \softline
argument just now presented.  The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dimostrare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is here, in fact, a verb based on the Latin \softline
noun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 demonstratio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as used to refer to the development of proofs by means of syllogistic \softline
demonstration.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.96.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 17-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's words reflect Matthew 15:14, where Jesus says that the Pharisees are blind \softline
guides of the blind who follow them, adding that guide and flock shall all end up falling into a \softline
ditch.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.xi.4 Dante cites this passage, directing its barb against 'those wicked Italians \softline
who praise the vernacular of others while disparaging their own' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.xi.1) and who are \softline
therefore likewise headed toward disaster.  As Francesco Mazzoni argues ("Latini, Brunetto" \softline
[ED.1971.3], p. 580b), in this connection it is difficult not to think of Dante's fellow Florentine \softline
Brunetto Latini, who wrote his encyclopedic }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tresor}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in French rather than in his native vernacular \softline
(see Andr{\f2\u233\'e9}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  P{\f2\u233\'e9}zard [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante sous la pluie de feu}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Paris: Vrin, 1950)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ] for extensive development of \softline
this idea).  Also to be considered are the words, written shortly before or shortly after this passage \softline
(on the problems of dating }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dve}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: A Life in Works}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (New Haven: \softline
Yale University Press, 2001)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ], pp. 54-55), in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.xiii.1, when Dante 'exiles' \softline
Brunetto from the illustrious and courtly vernacular that he is championing, relegating him to the \softline
ash heap of the municipal vernacular, the 'street talk' that is to be avoided by serious poets.  In \softline
what seems to have been a change of heart, Brunetto, in the fifteenth canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , will be \softline
treated generously as Dante's vernacular 'teacher' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf. }{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.85), just as Virgil was his first Latin \softline
guide.  It seems clear that these two are joined only by Guido Guinizzelli as explicitly paternal \softline
figures of writerly authority for the Tuscan poet.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante refers to, whether as protagonist or as poet, various 'fathers' in the course of the \softline
poem (this is to exclude 'fathers' addressed by other characters).  Of those listed below, those \softline
numbered 2, 3, 4, 6, 8 are only addressed or referred to once; all the others have at least two \softline
other paternal moments for Dante, except for St. Bernard, who has only one other; Virgil leads all \softline
'fathers' with a dozen other occurrences.  Of these twelve 'fathers,' seven are addressed, those \softline
numbered 1, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12.  The parenthetic reference is to the first appearance of each \softline
'father.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (1) Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.110)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (2) Brunetto Latini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.83)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (3) Cato of Utica (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.33)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (4) Guido Guinizzelli (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.97)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (5) God (addressed as 'good Apollo,' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.28)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (6) St. Francis (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.85)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (7) Cacciaguida (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.16)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (8) St. Benedict (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.58)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (9) the sun (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.116)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (10) St. Peter (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.62)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (11) Adam (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.92)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (12) St. Bernard (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.63)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Frank Ordiway's lengthy article, "Brunetto and Dante," completed in draft ca. 1992 but still under 
revision, offers detailed analysis of the program of Dante's 'fathers' in the poem.  See, for his first \softline
treatment of this material, his doctoral dissertation (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Chaucer, and the Poetics of the Past}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[unpublished doctoral dissertation, Princeton University, 1990]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil, responding to Dante's request, carries his analysis of the loving human mind \softline
to the next level, the role of the rational soul in determining human choice and, therefore, action.  \softline
This tercet establishes the subject of Virgil's difficult clarification (vv. 22-39): how mind (the \softline
rational soul, created directly by God and instilled in the embryo last [see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXV.67-75]) \softline
reacts appetitively to external things.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1    The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 apprensiva}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (power of perception), already implicitly referred to in Dante's \softline
apostrophe of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imaginativa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (faculty of imagination) in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII.13-15, is the faculty of \softline
perception that reacts to the capturing of an image (referred to here as an }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 intenzione}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) of external \softline
reality in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imaginazione}{\plain \fs24 \f1  or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fantasia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see the note to verse 13-18).  The mind, as opposed to the \softline
'natural desire' of the senses (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.93 for this distinction), which is always errorless, is \softline
responsible for its choices and may err.  If its perception inclines toward what it contemplates, \softline
that is what we call love.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a discussion of this passage in light of the Aristotelian and Arabic roots of Dante's \softline
word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 intenzione}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see the entry for that term by Tullio Gregory (ED.1971.3), pp. 480b-481b.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Desire, love in action, now continues by extending toward its goal and remaining \softline
in this state as long as it takes pleasure in its appetition.  (For fire as an example of 'natural desire,' \softline
see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.91-92.)  Thus here Dante is comparing intellectual desire to natural \softline
desire, but also insisting on the distance between them.  Natural desire can never be culpable (e.g., \softline
fire always 'desires' to rise -- that is its natural inclination).  There is perhaps no moment in the \softline
poem of greater danger to its essential philosophical position.  Is human desire -- for money, food, \softline
or sexual pleasure -- not as 'natural' as this?  Does anyone }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  desire these things?  Dante's \softline
attempt to persuade us, as he may well have realized, reflects that of another }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dottore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 maestro}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
Jesus.  He, as the Gospels amply testify, also spoke frequently, in his parables, in terms of human \softline
desires that all could understand, e.g., of money, agriculture, marriage.  In all cases the listener is \softline
encouraged, even impelled, to understand that such pleasures, as great as they may be, will seem \softline
as nothing compared to the joys of Heaven.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Padoan ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XVIII,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, \softline
1967 (1964}{\plain \fs24 \f1 )]), pp. 668-70, suggests that Dante's definition of love in this canto intrinsically \softline
corrects Francesca's claims for the ineluctable nature of passionate love (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.103).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante was surely right to let his language here reflect an essentially sexual view of love.  \softline
Consider the last verse of this part of the passage, 'fin che la cosa amata il fa gioire' (as long as it \softline
enjoys the thing it loves [for this understanding of the conjunction }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fin che}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Francesco Mazzoni, \softline
cited by Bosco/Reggio in their commentary on this passage; in opposition, reading 'until it attains \softline
the thing it loves' as being more Thomistic, see Alfred A. Triolo (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's \softline
"Divine Comedy," Introductory Readings II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
(virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1993]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), p. 268]).  Arriving at \softline
this point in the argument, a reader would have to be pardoned for believing that whatever good \softline
the spirit of love pursues is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ipso facto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  good, just as the protagonist himself will shortly seem to \softline
believe (vv. 43-45).  But what is the nature of the 'moto spiritale' (movement of the spirit) of the 
'captive mind'?  That question is reflected in the crucial and concluding portion of Virgil's \softline
discourse.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The main candidates for this unenviable denomination, the errant folk who believe \softline
that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 all}{\plain \fs24 \f1  love is good (a proposition, as we have seen, that we might have considered unassailable a \softline
moment ago), have been Epicureans.  In the modern period this view is first offered by Scartazzini \softline
(comm. to verse 35) but then is held by many twentieth-century commentators.  Grabher (comm. \softline
to vv. 19-39) is of the opinion that this is the position of all love poets, including the younger \softline
Dante.  His view, sometimes combined with that of Scartazzini, has grown increasingly attractive \softline
to recent commentators.  Clearly, anyone who believes that love is in itself and always \softline
praiseworthy is among this group.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The 'imprint' on the 'wax' of our love becomes the crucial symbolic expression of the \softline
concept developed here.  The 'wax' clearly refers to the innate human potential to love, which is \softline
'stamped' by the image that the mind has extracted from reality; that 'stamp' may either be worthy \softline
or unworthy, while the 'wax' is always worthy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is, despite Virgil's last insistence on the (implicit) need for the proper exercise of \softline
the free will in choosing the objects of one's desire, understandable that Dante, up to this point, \softline
believes that the mind is completely responsive to internalized (by the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 apprensiva}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) external stimuli \softline
(the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 intenzione}{\plain \fs24 \f1  -- see verse 23), and thus irreprehensible in whatever choice it makes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This passage offers perhaps the only apparently material evidence in the poem that \softline
would tie both Virgil and Beatrice to an allegorical status, his role being that of Reason, hers, \softline
Faith.  But see Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
[virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), p. 42, n. 2: 'It is from Virgil's lips that we first hear the name Beatrice... in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : VI.46; XV.77; XVIII.48.  In her first three nominal presences in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ... she is \softline
associated first with hope (VI.32), then with love (XV.68; XV.71; XV,74), then with faith.'  Thus \softline
associated with the three theological virtues, Beatrice can be seen as possessing all of them; she \softline
probably should not be seen as representing any one of them, or as having an 'allegorical' status in \softline
this poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In keeping with all of the ratiocination found in this canto, words for 'reason' in various \softline
noun and verb forms are found in it far more than in any other (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII finishes a distant \softline
second with four occurrences), as follows: vv. 1, 12, 46, 65, 67, 85, 120.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The three cantos at the center of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  devote what may seem immoderate \softline
space to what Benedetto Croce disliked in Dante, his 'non-poesia,' his 'structure,' his mere }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 allotria}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(the 'extraneous matter' of philosophy or theology that Croce deprecated in Dante; opposing such \softline
views, Fernando Salsano [{\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XV,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le \softline
Monnier, 1967)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ], p. 542, speaks of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as 'un poema e non un libro di poesie'}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  For an \softline
examination of what Croce's kind of aestheticizing denies to Dante's poem, precisely the validity \softline
and beauty of its conceptual structure, see Giorgio Stabile ("Cosmologia e teologia nella \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : la caduta di Lucifero e il rovesciamento del mondo," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1983]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), pp. \softline
139-44.  Stabile is surely correct in arguing that Croce's oppositional binome structure/poetry fails \softline
to account for the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 aesthetic}{\plain \fs24 \f1  possibilities of Dante's versified conceptual thinking.  Marco's long \softline
speech in XVI (65-129), Virgil's in XVII (91-139), and Virgil's concluding two in this canto (16-39; 49-75) should be looked upon, as should the related discursive portions of Cantos XXIV and \softline
XXV, as part of a continuing development of a complex statement about the nature and function \softline
of love, presented from different vantage points.  In Canto XXIV, Dante's presentation of the \softline
Holy Spirit's creative role in helping to make the writings of a handful of poets acceptable to God \softline
prepares for the following treatment in Canto XXV of the way the Holy Spirit is breathed into all \softline
of us, thus explaining how eventually a very few of us may become acceptable to God as His \softline
saints in paradise.  In these three cantos Marco the Lombard explains the need for proper civil \softline
governance because our free will may elsewise lead us astray, while Virgil takes up a related \softline
topic, the need for us individually to use our free will correctly in choosing and responding to the \softline
objects of our attention and affection.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The only 'substantial form' to be both distinct from matter and joined to it is the \softline
human soul, which is formed by pure divine intellect (as are the angels) and by emotional and \softline
vegetative powers (as are the beasts).  Its }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 specifica vertute}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (defining disposition), as we learn at \softline
vv. 55-57, is composed of primal intellect and primal will, and is only perceptible in the action of \softline
the soul, not in itself.  Now, leaving intellection out of consideration, Virgil continues: We have \softline
no recollection or current understanding of our original inclination (to love God), yet we do \softline
demonstrate its presence in us, as the eagerness of bees for making honey reveals their 'defining \softline
disposition.'  This kind of (natural) will exists beyond and before moral assent.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This innate will (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.105, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 la virt{\f3 \'6a} che vuole}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [the power that wills]) \softline
must accord with }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 la virt{\f3 \'6a} che consiglia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ('the faculty that counsels'), the higher intellect that should \softline
govern all our choices; our ability to choose good and to discard wrongful affections is the ground \softline
for the measurement of our moral condition.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Aristotle's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ethics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is probably Dante's main source for his views on morality (a view \softline
supported by Benvenuto da Imola [comm. to vv. 67-75]).  However, to account for the plurality \softline
of the reference, Poletto (comm. to these verses) sensibly refers to Dante's own earlier phrasing \softline
(found in the words of his guide, Virgil), 'I speak of Aristotle and of Plato / and of many others' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.43-44).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's lengthy discourse concludes with his final insistence on the pivotal role of \softline
free will in individual moral responsibility and looks forward (as Benvenuto was perhaps the first \softline
to realize [see his comm. to vv. 67-75]) to Beatrice's remarks on the subject in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.19-24, \softline
asseverating that the freedom of the will is the greatest of God's gifts to humankind.  Many of the \softline
early commentators find this a convenient place for them to reassert the 'allegorical' valence of \softline
Beatrice, here interpreted as 'Theology.'  In the past 150 years most commentators are content to \softline
leave the allegorical equation in abeyance, merely referring to Beatrice as herself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Returning to narrative, the poet returns to telling the time.  The moon, as the \softline
slowest 'planet' in Dante's astronomy, is fittingly the celestial body referred to on the terrace of \softline
Sloth.  Its appearance is compared by Benvenuto (comm. to these lines) to the semicircular fire in \softline
a lighthouse, glowing throughout the night.  Commentators are divided as to exactly what is \softline
involved here, i.e., whether it is the moon's rising that is referred to or its current position in the \softline
sky.  Singleton's discussion (comm. to vv. 76-78) resuscitates Edward Moore's early essay (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The 
Time References in the "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [London 1887]) to support the notion that there is \softline
no reference here to moonrise (the cause of endless resultant debate in the commentaries about \softline
the precise hour that would then be indicated), but to the moon being high enough in the sky to \softline
dim the brightness of the stars at the approach of midnight.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The moon, Dante would seem to be saying, was roughly on the same path taken by the \softline
sun when it sets in the southwest (when seen from Rome) in late November, between Sardinia and \softline
Corsica.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist's gratitude to Virgil is expressed with a salute to his birthplace, \softline
Pietola ('Andes' in Roman times).  Some early commentators read the phrase 'pi{\f3 \'6a} che villa \softline
mantoana' to mean 'more than the city Mantua,' while the meaning is nearly certainly 'more than \softline
any Mantuan town,' i.e., any other town in the vicinity of the city, not Mantua itself, as Padoan \softline
({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XVIII,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1967 (1964)]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), \softline
p. 688n., agrees.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 87-88.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Again a detail -- Dante's somnolence -- establishes a connection with Sloth.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 89-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These penitents, as opposed to the wrathful, move in the same counterclockwise \softline
direction that is followed by Dante and Virgil.  It would seem that, while the movement of Dante \softline
to the right is morally determined, that of the penitents is not, is rather the result of aesthetic \softline
considerations.  Review of the various groups that are in motion suggests that such is the case. \softline
Below the gate, we see that the excommunicate are moving rightwards (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.59), while the \softline
late-repentant seem to be heading to the left (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.23).  On the terraces, the prideful seem to \softline
be moving right (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.100), while the wrathful are headed left (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.142).  Here in Sloth \softline
the penitents come from behind Virgil and Dante but are moving in the same direction (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XVIII.90).  Farther up the mountain the penitent gluttons are also moving counterclockwise \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII.19-20), while the two distinct bands of the lustful proceed in two different \softline
directions (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.29).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is a fairly rare occurrence in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a simile based explicitly on classical \softline
materials (but see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.34-42, for the similetic reference to Statius's Achilles).  And there will \softline
not be another (now based on a passage in Lucan) until }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.64-69.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Ismenus and Asopus are names of rivers, the first flowing through the city of Thebes, the \softline
second near it.  Beginning with Jacopo della Lana (comm. to these verses), commentators have \softline
offered the opinion, from time to time, that Dante's source here is Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX).  Ismenos \softline
is named at IX.404, his 'brother' Asopos at IX.449.  That passage includes two references to the \softline
orgiastic Bacchic rites (IX.434-436; 478-480) to which Dante here refers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-98.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Running in a group to counteract the painful memory of their solitary slothful \softline
behaviors on earth, all these gathered penitents may put contemporary readers in mind of the \softline
massed crowds of runners in metropolitan marathons.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 99-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   With the exception of the concluding interaction with the angel in the following \softline
canto, separated by Dante's sleep and dream from the action on the fourth terrace, all the usual \softline
'events' of any terrace are here condensed -- in the compressed style appropriate to the description 
of the newly zealous -- into these forty verses.  All terraces include the following features in the \softline
same order: (1) description of the physical aspect of the terrace, (2) exemplars of the countering \softline
virtue, (3) description of the penitents, (4) recitation of their sins by particular penitents, (5) \softline
exemplars of the vice, (6) appearance to Dante of the angel representing the opposing virtue.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab We might want to reflect on the extraordinary artisanship of the presentation of the \softline
exemplary material on the earlier terraces, things not matched by what we find in earlier medieval \softline
poems: the 'speaking' (and odoriferous) intaglios of Pride, the voices streaking overhead in Envy, \softline
the ecstatic visions of Wrath.  It is as though Dante had used up all the brilliant new techniques of \softline
presentation of which he could think and now, for the rest of the ascent, subsides to the perfectly \softline
acceptable artistic level of utterance, leaving us to marvel at what he had done before.  On three \softline
of the last four terraces the names (sometimes accompanied by reference to significant deeds) of \softline
all exemplary figures are simply called out by the penitents, while on the terrace of Gluttony, in a \softline
variant, the two trees do the talking.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 99-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Petrocchi's punctuation of this passage and of that devoted to the final exemplary \softline
figures, vv. 133-138, is probably not well conceived.  Since there are two voices speaking, and \softline
since each pair of examples is divided by the copulative 'e' (and), it seems nearly certain that each \softline
voice recites a single example.  Thus the 'e' in both passages should, alone, be outside quotation \softline
marks, thus marking each of the two statements as being registered by a different voice.  \softline
Otherwise, what use was there in having }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 two}{\plain \fs24 \f1  anonymous voices giving the examples?  Scartazzini \softline
(comm. to verse 99) points out that the first two speakers, by virtue of leading the pack, are \softline
intrinsically the 'fastest' and thus most qualified to offer the positive }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 exempla}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , while the last two, \softline
bringing up the rear, most appropriately give forth the negative ones.  See also Pier Giorgio Ricci \softline
("Il Canto XVIII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le Monnier, \softline
1970]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), pp. 260-63, discussing the paired voices and the problem with the punctuation adopted by \softline
Petrocchi.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Some of the earliest commentators believe that the reference is to the precipitous escape \softline
from Herod's decree and the flight of the holy family into Egypt (a misinterpretation that surfaced \softline
again in the Renaissance in the commentaries of Landino and Vellutello).  However, beginning \softline
with Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to verse 100) the obvious citation of Luke 1:39 has been \softline
recognized as governing this example.  Mary, having been told by Gabriel during the \softline
Annunciation of Elizabeth's miraculous pregnancy in her old age (which will result in the birth of \softline
John the Baptist), 'abiit in montana cum festinatione... et salutavit Elisabeth' (went with good \softline
speed into the hill country... and offered her salutation to Elizabeth).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 101-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1    The Roman example paired with Mary is none other than Julius Caesar.  It is \softline
notable that in Lucan (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.453) Caesar's rushing off to do battle in Spain is not the result of \softline
military strategy but of his being bored (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 inpatiens}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) with the prolonged efforts to lay siege to \softline
Marseilles.  Further, his eventual victory at Lerida is described by Lucan as being the result of \softline
fortunate changes in the weather (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.48-49).  Thus Dante's praise of him here is clearly at \softline
odds with Lucan's (always) withering scorn for the Great Man whom he so desperately despises.  \softline
For the entire question of Dante's divided view of Julius Caesar, in one view the first, God-sent \softline
emperor of Rome, in another the destroyer of the Republic and of Roman virtue, see Stull and \softline
Hollander ("The Lucanian Source of Dante's Ulysses," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  63 [1991 (1997)]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), pp. \softline
33-43.  This is one of Julius's few positive moments in Dante's poem; and Dante needed to 
disregard Lucan's views in order to present him favorably.  John of Serravalle's gloss (to vv. 97-102) might have pleased him: 'Cesar fuit recte inimicus accidie, fuit valde sollicitus.  Semper \softline
dicebat militibus: Venite; nunquam dixit: Ite' (Caesar was indeed an enemy to sloth, a \softline
pronouncedly zealous one at that.  He was always calling to his soldiers 'Come' and never once \softline
said 'Go').  For Dante's previous and next far less favorable references to Julius, see the notes to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.133-138 and XXVI.76-78.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   On every other terrace the penitents have a prayer that they speak in common when \softline
they are not interrupted by other forms of observance or by conversation with Dante and Virgil \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.1-24; XIII.50-51; XVI.19; XIX.73; XXIII.11; XXV.121).  The terrace of Sloth \softline
offers the only exception, as though the previous }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 acedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of these penitents took from them the \softline
privilege of Christian prayer.  The gloss of Carroll (to vv. 103-105) is interesting: 'The idea \softline
seems... to be the danger of contemplation of good deeds, without an eager and immediate effort \softline
to imitate them.  Mere "study" of them may end in the "little love" which produces sloth.  It is \softline
only when "study" is accompanied by action that it "makes grace bud again.''  For Dante, a man \softline
devoted to the pursuit of the morally engaged active life, certain occasions for prayer perhaps \softline
appeared to offer a potential escape from one's civil and religious duty in the world.  Men and \softline
women of such disposition are thus, here in their penitence, denied the comfort of prayer until \softline
such time as prayer will be totally zealous, not the occasion for a moment of repose from worldly \softline
responsibility or, for that matter, from proper monastic exertion.  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Acedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was frequently \softline
associated with improper monastic }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 otium}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a withdrawal from the world but from one's duty to \softline
God, as well, surely a great temptation in the relative ease allowed by monastic life.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 104-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrase 'per poco amor' (for lack of love) and the word 'studio' (the Italian \softline
equivalent of the Latin word for 'zeal') combine to underline the defining vice and virtue of this \softline
terrace.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 107.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's 'perhaps' is a gentle act of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 politesse}{\plain \fs24 \f1  on his part: these penitents were guilty of \softline
precisely what he describes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 113-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The extreme courtesy of this speaker cancels whatever thoughts of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 villania}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(discourtesy) Dante or we might have.  His identity -- such as it is -- will be revealed immediately.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   San Zeno, just outside the city of Verona (and, by common consent, one of the \softline
most beautiful churches in Italy), was also the site of a monastery.  Its nameless abbot, who \softline
speaks here, is generally identified as Gherardo II, who served, during the reign of the Emperor \softline
Frederick I, from 1163 until his death in 1187.  Frederick Barbarossa, emperor (from 1152 until \softline
his death in 1190) as Frederick I, was a grandfather of Frederick II (emperor 1215-1250).  \softline
Dante's overall opinion of him is difficult to measure, since he so rarely refers to him, but in the \softline
two passages that do invoke his presence, here and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.20, his destruction of Milan in \softline
1162 for its anti-imperial activities is clearly applauded.  On the question of Dante's views of \softline
Barbarossa see Bruno Nardi ("Dante e il buon Barbarossa," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  7 [1966], pp. 3-27}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the less than likely possibility that the adjective 'buon' (good) that precedes his name is \softline
here to be taken ironically, see Tommaseo's commentary to this passage.  One may add that the \softline
thirty occasions in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  on which a reader finds the epithet combined with a name or 
title (e.g., 'buon Marzucco,' 'buon maestro') do not reveal a single one in which an ironic reading \softline
seems warranted.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante, welcomed by the Scaligeri family to Verona in 1303-4, there enjoyed the \softline
first happy time of his exile.  His memories of those rulers of the city give rise to a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 post-eventum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
prophecy.  Alberto della Scala was lord of Verona until his death in 1301, by which time he had \softline
appointed his lame, illegitimate son, Giuseppe (1263-1313), to serve as abbot of the monastery (in \softline
1292), for the rest of his days.  Alberto was succeeded by his eldest legitimate son, Bartolommeo, \softline
nearly certainly Dante's first host in Verona.  Upon Bartolommeo's death, in 1304, Alberto's \softline
second son, Alboino, became lord (many believe that Dante and Alboino did not get along, thus \softline
explaining Dante's departure from Verona ca. 1304), a position he held until his death in 1311, \softline
when he was succeeded by Cangrande della Scala, the third legitimate son and Dante's patron and \softline
host when the poet returned to Verona ca. 1314.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The nameless abbot is moving so quickly that Dante cannot tell whether he has \softline
finished speaking or has simply moved too far ahead to be heard while continuing to speak -- a \softline
nice final touch to convey the zeal with which he is exercising his penitence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 131-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the reason that there are two anonymous speakers and for the probable \softline
punctuation of vv. 133-138, see the note to vv. 99-102.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first example of the sin of Sloth indicates the Hebrews who, having made \softline
the passage through the Red Sea, grew restive under Moses' guidance and died of plague before \softline
the completed exodus across Jordan into the Promised Land accomplished only by Joshua and \softline
Caleb.  See Numbers 14:1-38 and Deuteronomy 1:26-40.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Similarly, some of Aeneas's companions, egged on by Iris, disguised as the wife \softline
of Doryclus, rebelled against the leadership of Aeneas and chose to remain in Sicily.  The matrons \softline
set fire to the ships and Aeneas, having saved all but four of them from destruction, allows all who \softline
wish to stay behind to do so (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.604-761).  Giorgio Padoan ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XVIII,{\u8221\'94} in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1967 (1964)]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), p. 686, argues that Dante's \softline
treatment of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V here differs from that found in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.xxvi.11, but the difference can \softline
be explained by the fact that in the earlier passage Dante focuses on the willingness of Aeneas to \softline
allow the discouraged to stay behind found in Virgil's text itself, while here he judges the \softline
malingerers from a different vantage point, the divinely sanctioned imperative to found new Troy \softline
in Latium.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This discussion is part of a wider one (pp. 680-88), which returns to Padoan's earlier \softline
attempts to alert the reader to the question of which allegorical understanding of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
governs the reading of Virgil that is manifest in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  It is possible that, despite such \softline
earlier allegorical formulations of the meaning of Virgil's epic as are found in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.xxvi.8-9 (or, for Lucan's epic, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.xxviii.13-19), Dante had turned his back on philological \softline
allegory as the key to anything central in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and read the poem historically, much as he \softline
wanted his own poem to be read.  For this argument see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), pp. 78-94, citing D.L.M. Drew's \softline
previous arguments for a 'non-allegorical' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (p. 81n.).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 141-142.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 novo pensiero }{\plain \fs24 \f1 (new thought) has puzzled his commentators.  \softline
Is it one triggered by what he has seen and heard?  Or is he anticipating the matters he will \softline
rehearse in his dream in the next canto?  Or is the poet merely describing, generically, the way in \softline
which the mind works as it flits from subject to subject on the way to sleep (a view that is much \softline
present in the commentaries)?  In the next canto, a similar phrase will refer to a mental image \softline
already experienced (the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 novella vis{\f3 \'56}on}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of XIX.56) in his previous dream.  Thus here it is at least \softline
possible that the 'new thought' is a response to what he has seen or heard.  Could he have \softline
wondered whether he was himself more like the backsliding Hebrews and Trojans than he is like \softline
Joshua or Aeneas?  This would seem possible, but not demonstrable.  In any case, this unreported \softline
thought leads to still others, and these are clearly -- because the text tells us so -- the matter of his \softline
dream.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 143.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The verb Dante uses to describe his floating state of consciousness, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vaneggiai}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(rambled), picks up an earlier phrasing, when he compares himself to one who }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sonnolento vana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(rambles in his drowsy mind -- verse 87) after Virgil has finished his explanation of love and free \softline
will.  There he is falling into a fatigue that mirrors the sin purged on this terrace.  Here he finally \softline
gives in to that weight of somnolence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 145.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's purgatorial dreams are described in cantos IX, XIX, and XXVII, but the \softline
second occurs here, in a single line, 'e 'l pensamento in sogno trasmutai' (and I transformed my \softline
musings into dream).  Since in}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  he presents his age as having been nine, eighteen, and \softline
twenty-seven for his three main 'encounters' with Beatrice, the poet perhaps wanted to retain \softline
those three nine-based and nine-spaced numbers for his three dreams that lead back to her now.  \softline
For this calculation see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1969]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), p. 145.\par
}}