{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f2\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\s1 \qj _26;}
{\s2 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _25;}
{\s3 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _24;}
{\s4 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _23;}
{\s5 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _22;}
{\s6 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _21;}
{\s7 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _20;}
{\s8 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _19;}
{\s9 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _18;}
{\s10 \qj\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _17;}
{\s11 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _16;}
{\s12 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _15;}
{\s13 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _14;}
{\s14 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _13;}
{\s15 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _12;}
{\s16 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _11;}
{\s17 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _10;}
{\s18 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _9;}
{\s19 \qj\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _8;}
{\s20 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _7;}
{\s21 \qj\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _6;}
{\s22 \qj\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _5;}
{\s23 \qj\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _4;}
{\s24 \qj\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _3;}
{\s25 \qj\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _2;}
{\s26 \qj\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _1;}
{\s27 \qj\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz914\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24\tx0\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640
{\plain \fs24 \b PURGATORIO CANTO 05}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 1-3.}{\plain \fs24   The canto begins with the protagonist's forward and upward propulsion but quickly \softline
reverses its sense of moral direction when Dante glances back, hearing the voice of one of the \softline
negligent behind him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 4-6.}{\plain \fs24   Singleton (comm. to vv. 5-6) argues that, because when Dante approached these \softline
late-repentant souls in the previous canto the sun was before him (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . IV.101), his shadow \softline
now fell behind him and, for this reason (or because, as Grabher [comm. to vv. 1-9] noted, in the \softline
shade of the boulder he was out of the sun), was not observed by the onlookers until now when, \softline
moving away from them, he cast a shadow at an oblique angle.  The sun was to Dante's left when \softline
he turned back toward the east (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . IV.52-57); now as he heads west it is to his right, casting \softline
his shadow to his left.  (For the various moments in this }{\plain \fs24 \i cantica}{\plain \fs24  in which Dante's shadow is \softline
remarked upon, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . III.16-18.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 7-8.}{\plain \fs24   Dante does not stop, but he does slow his pace as he looks back, as Virgil's words \softline
will make clear (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . V.11).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 9.}{\plain \fs24   How is the reader meant to take the poet's remembrance of his feelings at being \softline
recognized as a living soul?  Was he guilty of the sin of pride?  Some unknown early readers \softline
believed so, as we know because Benvenuto tacitly but strongly rebukes them (comm. to vv. 7-9).  In his view Dante's excitement is not that of self-congratulation, but rather of joy in his \softline
having been chosen by God for this experience, exactly that feeling expressed by Paul when he \softline
said 'thanks be to God I am what I am' (I Corinthians 15:10).  Benvenuto's disciple, John of \softline
Serravalle (comm. to vv. 7-12), however, does indeed see the taint of vainglory in Dante's \softline
memory of the intense gaze of the penitent souls.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 10-18.}{\plain \fs24   The astonished souls who whisper to one another about Dante's extraordinary \softline
status are perhaps reminiscent of earthly neighbors whose secret gossip is generally motivated by \softline
less kind concerns.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Discussing this passage, Frankel ("La similitudine della zara [}{\plain \fs24 \i\lang1040 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \lang1040 . VI, 1-12] ed il \softline
rapporto fra Dante e Virgilio nell'Antepurgatorio," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\lang1040 Studi Americani su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \lang1040 , ed. G. C. \softline
Alessio and R. Hollander [Milan: F. Angeli, 1989], pp. 127-30, points out that Virgil's urgency \softline
in trying to get Dante to resume his forward movement is not found in Virgil himself when he \softline
encounters Sordello in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  VII and much enjoys his fellow Mantuan's interest and praise.  \softline
And, while there have been other commentators who find Virgil's scolding excessive, the fact \softline
remains that the protagonist takes it most seriously (see }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . V.19-21).  Further, all that Virgil \softline
rebukes in Dante is his allowing his attention to wander, distracted by his admirers, from the \softline
prime purpose of the journey, i.e., he is acting to some degree like these negligent souls who \softline
were active Christians only near the end of their lives.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 14-15.}{\plain \fs24   There has been a small industry, begun (as is so often the case) by the classicizing \softline
Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 13-15), which has tried to find a particular Virgilian text (at least four \softline
have been offered) or a passage from Seneca as 'source' for these lines.  That no classical source \softline
was proposed by any of the medieval or Renaissance commentators, however, makes the claim \softline
less attractive than it might be, as does the fact that the context of the passage cited most often 
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . X.693-696) involves a simile that compares Mezentius, about to begin his final heroic \softline
assaults on the Trojan foe which will end in his death at the hands of Aeneas, with a cliff jutting \softline
out into the sea, and not a 'tower.'  Thus the context is hardly propitious and the comparison not \softline
particularly similar.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 19-21.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's blush of shame clearly justifies Virgil's indignation: the protagonist has \softline
been thinking of himself too much.  And with this detail, indeed, the poem resumes its forward \softline
thrust, begun at }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  V.1-2, but interrupted for seventeen lines.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 23-24.}{\plain \fs24   The new penitents enter singing the Psalm (50:1) that furnished the protagonist's \softline
own first word in the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . I.65), }{\plain \fs24 \i Miserere}{\plain \fs24 , the first word of David's song of penance.  \softline
Unlike the last group of late-repentant souls, lounging in the shade of their rock, these are \softline
moving in the same rightward direction that Virgil has urged Dante to follow.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab What does }{\plain \fs24 \i a verso a verso}{\plain \fs24  mean?  The earliest commentator to deal with the phrase, \softline
Francesco da Buti (comm. to vv. 22-30), suggests that it means the group was divided into two \softline
'choruses' and sang the verses responsively.  There is no indication in the text that this is so.  \softline
Still, this early commentator's authority is great enough so that, with only a few divergences \softline
(e.g., Vellutello [comm. to vv. 22-24], Trucchi [comm. to vv. 22-24] , almost all repeat this \softline
formulation, including Singleton (comm. to verse 24), even though he translates the line as we \softline
do.  Chimenz (comm. to vv. 22-24), however, offers good reasons not to accept this formulation: \softline
(1) the text makes no mention of any such grouping; (2) when they utter their amazed 'Oh!' the \softline
entire group has apparently been singing as one; (3) all the other prayers spoken by groups in \softline
purgatory are spoken in unison.  After Chimenz there has been a certain change of opinion \softline
among some commentators -- as seems only sensible.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 25-27.}{\plain \fs24   It is noteworthy that these penitents behave precisely as did the negligent, \softline
showing their astonishment and curiosity at Dante's embodied presence in the sacred precinct of \softline
the saved.  It is also striking that this time Virgil will offer no rebuke to Dante for his interest in \softline
them, which will slow his forward movement.  If one reflects that this encounter is part of the \softline
protagonist's 'education' on the mountainside, the apparent contradiction begins to resolve itself.  \softline
Dante's previous interest was in the negligent souls' reaction to him, not in what he could learn \softline
from them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 28-30.}{\plain \fs24   Unlike other characters who enter the action of the poem unnamed but are later \softline
identified, these two messengers, seeking information about Dante's condition, will remain \softline
anonymous.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 31-36.}{\plain \fs24   For all the asperity of Virgil's response to the 'messengers,' it is clear that he is \softline
aware of and in favor of Dante's ability to help speed the progress toward purgation of these and \softline
other souls in ante-purgatory (verse 36).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 37-40.}{\plain \fs24   The similetic comparison may find its roots in Virgil's description of shooting \softline
stars in his }{\plain \fs24 \i Georgics}{\plain \fs24  (I.365-367), according to Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 37-39) and, more \softline
recently, to Hermann Gmelin (}{\plain \fs24 \i Kommentar: der L{\f1\u228\'e4}uterungsberg}{\plain \fs24  [Stuttgart: Klett, 1955]), }{\plain \fs24 \i ad loc}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 45.}{\plain \fs24   Once again Virgil underlines the propriety of Dante's favorable response to requests 
for his intervention on behalf of the penitents as long as he continues his way up the mountain \softline
while he does so.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 46-48.}{\plain \fs24   Rejoined by its two 'messengers,' the group as a whole now speaks to Dante, \softline
asking his help for those whom he may recognize.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 53.}{\plain \fs24   As Chiavacci Leonardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24  [Milan: \softline
Mondadori, 1994]), pp. 143-44, points out, the phrase 'sinners to the final hour' is probably \softline
meant to recall Matthew 20:1-16, the parable of the laborers in the vineyard, where even those \softline
who are summoned to work at the eleventh hour were paid the same as those who labored all the \softline
day: 'So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many are called, but few are chosen' (20:16).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 55.}{\plain \fs24   It is noteworthy that salvation was possible for these sinners only after their own \softline
belated penitence }{\plain \fs24 \i and}{\plain \fs24  their forgiveness of those who had caused their deaths.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 58-63.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's acquiescence in being willing to bring news of their salvations pointedly \softline
includes those whom he does not know, encouraging them to make a request that might, to them, \softline
have seemed too bold.  The words he uses for these souls, 'spiriti ben nati' (spirits born for bliss) \softline
contrast sharply with the formulation for those who were described as 'mal nati' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . V.7; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
XVIII.76; }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXX.48).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 64.}{\plain \fs24   The speaker, never identified by name, either in his own speech of 21 lines (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
V.64-84) or by the narrator, is Jacopo del Cassero, born ca. 1260.  'He was among the Guelf \softline
leaders who joined the Florentines in their expedition against Arezzo in 1288.  He incurred the \softline
enmity of Azzo VIII of Este by his opposition to the designs of the latter upon Bologna, of which \softline
city Jacopo was Podest{\f2 \'42} in 1296.  In revenge Azzo had him assassinated at Oriaco, between \softline
Venice and Padua, while he was on his way (in 1298) to assume the office of Podest{\f2 \'42} at Milan at \softline
the invitation of Maffeo Visconti.  He appears to have gone by sea from Fano to Venice, and \softline
thence to have proceeded towards Milan by way of Padua; but while he was still among the \softline
lagoons, only about eight miles from Venice, he was waylaid and stabbed' (Toynbee, "Cassero, \softline
Jacopo del" [}{\plain \fs24 \i Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 ]).  Clearly Dante knew that he could count on Jacopo's \softline
renown and on his readers' fairly wide acquaintance with the details of his life and death.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 69.}{\plain \fs24   Jacopo refers to the Marches, the area between Romagna, to the north, and the \softline
kingdom of Naples, governed by Charles of Anjou in 1300, to the south.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 71.}{\plain \fs24   Should Dante ever find himself in Fano, in the March of Ancona, where Jacopo's \softline
relatives and friends survive, his news of Jacopo's salvation may, by causing them to pray for \softline
him, serve to shorten his time in ante-purgatory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 74.}{\plain \fs24   Jacopo's blood, of which we shall hear more in his final lines, the seat of the soul \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . XXV.37-45), left his body through the wounds caused by the murderous Paduans who \softline
waylaid him in 1298.  Padua was founded by Antenor, according to Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . I.242-249).  \softline
Servius's comment on these verses added the detail that Antenor, before he escaped from Troy, \softline
had given the Greeks the Palladium, thus connecting him with betrayal of one's country (and \softline
suggesting to Dante a name, Antenora, for the second region of the ninth Circle of hell [}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . 
XXXII.88]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 77-78.}{\plain \fs24   Azzo VIII d'Este became marquis of Este in 1293.  Jacopo here would seem to be \softline
suggesting that the Paduans who killed him were in cahoots with Azzo, the ringleader of the plot.  \softline
Dante's own former opinion of Azzo was negative (see }{\plain \fs24 \i De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24  I.xii.5; II.vi.4).  \softline
Here Jacopo admits a certain culpability in having aroused Azzo's wrath, reminding us that he \softline
has had to forgive his slayer in order to have been saved.  The commentator Jacopo della Lana \softline
(comm. to vv. 70-72) gives some of the reasons for Azzo's hatred of Jacopo.  When Azzo wanted \softline
to make himself ruler of Bologna, the Bolognesi called on Jacopo to be }{\plain \fs24 \i podest{\f2 \'42}}{\plain \fs24  of their city.  In \softline
opposing Azzo he, according to the fourteenth-century commentator, was unceasing in his \softline
vilifications of his enemy, claiming, for instance, that he had slept with his stepmother and was \softline
in fact the son of a washerwoman.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab For the sin of wrath, in its hardened form, as a sin of will and not of incontinence, see the \softline
notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  VII.109-114 and XII.16-21 (last paragraph).  Because Azzo was alive in 1308, \softline
Dante could not place him in hell; it seems likely that he would have considered setting him \softline
down among the murderers in the company of his father, Obizzo, whom Azzo indeed, according \softline
to many commentators, strangled in 1293.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XII.111-112.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 79-80.}{\plain \fs24   Jacopo, reconsidering his actions, realizes that he might have made good his \softline
escape had he proceeded west in the direction of Milano and headed for the town of La Mira, \softline
rather than stopping, off the main road, between Venice and Padua at Oriago.  Benvenuto \softline
believes that he was on horseback (as seems reasonable) and thus could have made his escape \softline
along the good road to La Mira, while the swampy overgrowth made him easy prey for his \softline
attackers, stalking him on foot, when he turned back to hide himself but was seen and attacked.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 83-84.}{\plain \fs24   Fallen (from his horse?) and apparently hacked to death by those who pursued \softline
him on foot, Jacopo watches his blood (and thus his soul) pass from his body.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 88.}{\plain \fs24   Buonconte da Montefeltro (ca. 1250-1289) was the son of the great Ghibelline \softline
leader, Guido da Montefeltro (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.19-132; and see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.4-6).  'In June \softline
1287 Buonconte helped the Ghibellines to expel the Guelfs from Arezzo, an event which was the \softline
beginning of the war between Florence and Arezzo; in 1288 he was in command of the Aretines \softline
when they defeated the Sienese at Pieve del Toppo; and in 1289 he was appointed captain of the \softline
Aretines and led them against the Guelfs of Florence, by whom they were totally defeated (June \softline
11) at Campaldino, among the slain being Buonconte himself, whose body, however, was never \softline
discovered on the field of battle' (Toynbee, "Buonconte" [}{\plain \fs24 \i Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 ]).  It is \softline
important to remember that Dante himself was present at this battle as a cavalryman (see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XII.75) in what was, for him and his fellow Florentine Guelphs, a great victory.  \softline
Once again we sense his ability to identify with the loser (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXI.95).  There is \softline
not a trace of triumphalism in his exchange with the fallen leader of his enemies.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 89-90.}{\plain \fs24   Unlike Jacopo del Cassero, who hopes that his relatives and friends will pray for \softline
him (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . V.71), Buonconte realizes that his wife, Giovanna, and other family members have \softline
no concern for him.  Unlike Jacopo and others of his band, he has been devoid of the hope that \softline
has urged the rest to petition Dante for his aid.  Now he finds hope in this visitor from the world \softline
of the living.  This poem, which summarizes its purpose as being to make the living pray better 
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Par}{\plain \fs24 . I.35-36), nowhere better indicates this purpose than in ante-purgatory in such scenes as \softline
these.  It is undoubtedly the case that any number of people who read or heard the poem in the \softline
fourteenth century actually prayed for the souls of those whom Dante reports as needing such \softline
prayer.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 91-93.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's desire for knowledge of what happened to Buonconte's body reflects the \softline
concern of others present at the battle of Campaldino.  How could the body of so important a \softline
personage simply disappear?  Several students of this passage have suggested that the poet here \softline
has in mind Virgil's portrait of Palinurus, so deeply troubled by his unburied state, and consider \softline
the protagonist's question a recasting of Aeneas's question to Palinurus: 'Which of the gods, \softline
Palinurus, tore you from us and submerged you in the open sea?' (}{\plain \fs24 \i Aen}{\plain \fs24 . VI.341-342).  While the \softline
linguistic fit is not a perfect one, both the circumstance and the fact that Dante seems to have the \softline
Palinurus passage in mind at }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  III.130 -- and surely does so at VI.28-30 -- makes the \softline
reference at least plausible.  Anna Maria Chiavacci Leonardi ("Dante e Virgilio," }{\plain \fs24 \i Letture \softline
classensi}{\plain \fs24  12 [1983]), p. 88n., noted it, as now have Carol Ann Cioffi ("Fame, Prayer, and \softline
Politics: Virgil's Palinurus in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  V and VI," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  110 [1992], pp. 179-200) and \softline
Ruggero Stefanini ("Buonconte and Palinurus: Dante's Re-Working of a Classical Source," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante: Summa Medievalis}{\plain \fs24 , ed. C. Franco and L. Morgan [Stony Brook, N.Y.: Forum Italicum, \softline
1995], pp. 100-11).  And for the view that Palinurus operates as a foil to Buonconte, see \softline
Michelangelo Picone ("Canto V," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 , ed. Georges G{\f1\u252\'fc}ntert \softline
and Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001 (1999)]), pp. 78-80.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 94-99.}{\plain \fs24   The Casentino lies in the upper valley of the Arno.  The torrent Archiano derives \softline
from sources above the valley near the monastery of Camaldoli, situated high in the mountains \softline
above the region.  The battle of Campaldino took place on a plain below this higher valley and it \softline
is the place to which Dante imagines the wounded Buonconte to have made his way, just where \softline
the Archiano joins the Arno, several miles above the site of the battle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 100-102.}{\plain \fs24   Peter Armour ("Words and the Drama of Death in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  V," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Word and \softline
Drama in Dante: Essays on the "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 , ed. John C. Barnes and Jennifer Petrie \softline
[Dublin: Irish Academic Press, 1993]), pp. 108-12, makes a strong case for punctuating the text \softline
differently than Petrocchi does, and we would have followed him, placing a comma after }{\plain \fs24 \i vista}{\plain \fs24  \softline
and dropping the semicolon in line 100 (as indeed a number of earlier texts also do), but for our \softline
editorial decision to follow Petrocchi.  This emendation makes the sense of the passage both \softline
more clear and more dramatic, breaking it into four parallel elements, each of the final three \softline
beginning with 'and,' recapitulating Buonconte's final moments: loss of sight, final utterance, \softline
physical collapse, departure of the soul from the body.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 104-108.}{\plain \fs24   As commentators notice, the struggle of the good and wicked angel over the \softline
soul of Buonconte mirrors the similar scene that occurs at the death of his father, Guido da \softline
Montefeltro (}{\plain \fs24 \i Inf}{\plain \fs24 . XXVII.112-117), when St. Francis and a fallen Cherub struggle for the soul of \softline
Guido.  Not even Francis can prevail against God's judgment -- if we can accept Guido's \softline
narrative at face value.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab A possible source for this scene is found in the Epistle of Jude (Jude 9) in a passage that \softline
refers to the archangel Michael's struggle with the devil for the body of Moses.  The relevance of \softline
this text to Dante's was perhaps first noted by Scartazzini in the 1870s (comm. to verse 104).  
For discussion, see Domenico Pietropaolo ("The Figural Context of Buonconte's Salvation," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  102 [1984], pp. 123-34), who points out (p. 125) that, like Buonconte's, the \softline
whereabouts of Moses' actual burial place was not known (Deuteronomy 34:6).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Buonconte's tear (verse 107) reminds us of the similarly plangent Manfred (}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
III.120).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 109-111.}{\plain \fs24   A number of recent commentators here note an echo of Virgil's first }{\plain \fs24 \i Georgic}{\plain \fs24  \softline
(Georg. I.322-324).  For the view that this passage reflects the description of the storm that \softline
drives Aeneas's ships off course in the first book of the }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  see A.E. Carter ("An \softline
Unrecognized Virgilian Passage in Dante," }{\plain \fs24 \i Italica}{\plain \fs24  21 [1944], pp. 149-53).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 112-114.}{\plain \fs24   Is Dante suggesting that evil forces have power only over the elements (and the \softline
dead bodies of humans -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 . V.108)?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 116.}{\plain \fs24   The mountain ridge Pratomagno and the alpine protuberances referred to establish \softline
the confines of the Casentino at the southwest and northeast, respectively.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \scaps \tab \tab }{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 117.}{\plain \fs24   Restoring a meaning offered in Benvenuto's commentary but perhaps never \softline
revisited and arguing against the scholarly exertions of others, Lino Pertile ("Bonconte e \softline
l'anafonesi [}{\plain \fs24 \i Purg}{\plain \fs24 ., V 109-18]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Filologia e critica}{\plain \fs24  21 [1996]), pp. 121-26, presents a strong case \softline
for the Tuscan form of the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i intingere}{\plain \fs24 's past participle, }{\plain \fs24 \i intinto}{\plain \fs24  in its regular form, but also \softline
found as }{\plain \fs24 \i intento}{\plain \fs24  (darkened).  We have accepted Pertile's reading in our translation. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 122.}{\plain \fs24   Dante's term for 'seaward stream' is }{\plain \fs24 \i fiume real}{\plain \fs24 , or 'royal river,' i.e., a river that ends \softline
in the sea.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 126-127.}{\plain \fs24   The 'cross' that Buonconte had made of his arms perhaps expresses both the \softline
gesture of a man in the throes of mortal pain and the sign of his hope for redemption.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 128-129.}{\plain \fs24   Buonconte's body finally came to rest on the Arno's bed, along with the detritus \softline
that the rushing torrent had borne along with it until it, too, settled to rest, mingled with the body \softline
of the man.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 130-136.}{\plain \fs24   The six verses devoted to Pia's speech have made her one of Dante's most \softline
remembered and admired portraits -- even though we do not really know who she was, to whom \softline
she was married (nor how many times, but perhaps twice), or who killed her, or how.  For the \softline
complicated, necessarily hypothetical, and eventually unknowable status of Pia's identity and \softline
story and the possible knowlege that Dante had of them, see Armour ("Words and the Drama of \softline
Death in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  V," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Word and Drama in Dante: Essays on the "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 , ed. \softline
John C. Barnes and Jennifer Petrie [Dublin: Irish Academic Press, 1993]), pp. 120-22.  See also \softline
Giorgio Varanini, "Pia" (ED.1973.4), pp. 462-67.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 133.}{\plain \fs24   Pia uses the 'polite imperative,' i.e., the impersonal subjunctive, to express her \softline
desire (i.e., 'may it be remembered by you'): she hopes to be remembered by Dante once he is \softline
back on earth so that he can pray for her, as Vellutello (comm. to vv. 130-136) suggests, or recall \softline
her to the minds of others for }{\plain \fs24 \i their}{\plain \fs24  prayers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 134.}{\plain \fs24   This line, celebrated for its brevity and power, has the lapidary quality of a \softline
headstone, perhaps because it represents one: the beginning of Virgil's epitaph, 'Mantua me \softline
genuit, Calabri rapuere....' (Mantua gave me birth, Calabria took me off), as Gmelin \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i Kommentar: der L{\f1\u228\'e4}uterungsberg}{\plain \fs24  [Stuttgart: Klett, 1955], }{\plain \fs24 \i ad loc}{\plain \fs24 .) was perhaps the first to \softline
suggest.  See the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  III.27 and VI.72.  And see Hollander ("Dante's 'Georgic' \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i Inferno}{\plain \fs24  XXIV, 1-18]," }{\plain \fs24 \i Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24  102 [1984], p. 119, n. 7).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Peter Armour ("Words and the Drama of Death in }{\plain \fs24 \i Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24  V," in }{\plain \fs24 \i Word and Drama in \softline
Dante: Essays on the "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 , ed. John C. Barnes and Jennifer Petrie [Dublin: Irish \softline
Academic Press, 1993]), p. 116, suggests that, if she was defenestrated by her husband (or one of \softline
his agents), as many early commentators claim, then the hard earth of the Maremma actually did \softline
'undo' her, smashing her body when she hit it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b 135-136.}{\plain \fs24   These final verses of the canto have drawn numerous attempts at a clear \softline
understanding.  However, without knowing the precise nature of the facts to which Dante has \softline
decided to allude, we cannot be certain.  Among the more interesting suggestions for a source is \softline
Hermann Gmelin's (}{\plain \fs24 \i Kommentar: der L{\f1\u228\'e4}uterungsberg}{\plain \fs24  [Stuttgart: Klett, 1955], }{\plain \fs24 \i ad loc}{\plain \fs24 .): the verses \softline
reflect Dido's remark about her dead husband, Sichaeus, at }{\plain \fs24 \i Aeneid}{\plain \fs24  IV.28-29: 'ille meos, }{\plain \fs24 \i primus \softline
qui me sibi iunxit}{\plain \fs24 , amores / abstulit; ille habeat secum servetque sepulchro' (He, who first joined \softline
me to him, has sealed up my love; may he have it with him and keep it in his grave).  The \softline
italicized phrase seems close enough to Dante's 'colui che 'nnanellata pria / disposando' to merit \softline
further thought, even if the contexts are not the same, a suffering wife and murderous husband \softline
replacing a loyal husband and a would-be loyal wife.  Did Pia's husband himself give her a ring \softline
of betrothal before they married or, as Varanini suggests, did the man who eventually killed her, \softline
the representative of her husband (one Magliata di Pionpino), present the ring for him?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The three 'autobiographies' that make up the last and largest part of this canto are \softline
strikingly similar in their construction.  Each character includes the following elements, in the \softline
same order, in his or her speech: (1) }{\plain \fs24 \i captatio benevolentiae}{\plain \fs24 ; (2) thoughts of homeland and \softline
possibility of hope for prayer from there; (3) place and cause of death; (4) moment of death.\par
}}