{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 01}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The opening metaphor of the new }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  relies on a topos familiar from classical \softline
poetry and medieval reformulations (see Curtius [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 European Literature and the Latin Middle \softline
Ages}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , tr. W. R. Trask (New York: Harper & Row, 1963 [1948])], pp. 128-30) that tie the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ingenium}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (genius) of the poet, treating his material, to the voyage of a ship over difficult waters.  \softline
Dante's ship, for now, is a small one (but cf. }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.1-3, where it is implicitly a much larger \softline
vessel), raising its sails over better ('smoother') 'water' than it traversed in hell.  While this \softline
metaphor will be important in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.1-18; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.94-96), framing that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
and representing the voyage as a whole, it was only implicit in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (as at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.22-24).  Once \softline
again we see Dante adding elements retroactively as the poem advances; we are now asked to \softline
understand that it has been, in metaphor, a ship all along, that hell is to be understood as a 'sea' in \softline
retrospect.   What the protagonist experienced as the belly of the earth the poet 'experienced' as a \softline
voyage over waters difficult for their challenge to his ability, not to his moral sense, which has \softline
been perfected, within the given of the poem, by his experience in purgatory, but now challenging \softline
his intellectual powers, even though they have been sealed by God's stamp in the Empyrean.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The second tercet encapsulates the entire }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Purgatory is that place in which \softline
the human spirit becomes fit for Heaven.  There is no longer a possibility, among the spirits whom \softline
we shall meet, of damnation.  Thus two-thirds of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , its two final }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , are \softline
dedicated to the saved, first }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 in potentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , then }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 in re}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The words that reflect the presence of the poet derive generically from classical poetry and \softline
perhaps specifically from the opening line of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 'Arma virumque }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cano}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' [Arms and the \softline
man I sing].  Dante presents himself as a singer of a kingdom, as other classical and medieval \softline
poets identified themselves by the realms that they celebrated, the 'matter of Troy,' or the 'matter \softline
of France,' etc.  But his 'kingdom' is not of this world, and no one has, at least in Dante's view, \softline
ever 'sung' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 this}{\plain \fs24 \f1  kingdom before. For the pre-history of purgatory see Rajna [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La materia e la \softline
forma della "Divina Commedia": I mondi oltraterreni nelle letterature classiche e nelle \softline
medievali}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Claudia Di Fonzo (Florence: Le Lettere, 1998 [1874]), esp. pp. 33-299], Jacques \softline
Le Goff [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Birth of Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , tr. A. Goldhammer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, \softline
1984 [1981])], and Alison Morgan [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante and the Medieval Other World}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Cambridge: \softline
Cambridge University Press, 1990), pp. 144-65].  For Dante's reliance on Gervase of Tillbury, see \softline
Paolo Cherchi ("Gervase of Tillbury and the Birth of Purgatory," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo romanzo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  14 [1989], \softline
pp. 97-110).  Morgan's book contains two useful appendices: a 'Chronological table of principal \softline
representations of the other world,' pp. 196-200, and 'Written representations of the other world -- summaries with background and bibliographical information,' pp. 201-33).  Le Goff \softline
demonstrates the lateness of the development of purgatory as a distinct place, beginning perhaps \softline
with St. Bernard, ca. 1170-80 (pp. 163-65), and underlines the major role of Dante in establishing \softline
the later sense of the place and its function (pp. 334-55).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The third invocation of the poem now adds the attribute 'holy' to the Muses (who \softline
were unadorned 'Muses' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.7 and 'those ladies' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.10), implying that the art of \softline
this part of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  must keep a more religious sense to its poeticizing, since its subject from \softline
here on is salvation.  Most commentators identify Calliope as the ninth and greatest (as \softline
representative of epic poetry) of the Muses.  Dante surely was aware of her being summoned both 
by Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.525) and by Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.338-340), the last as a part of the lengthy tale of \softline
the gods' revenge on the nine daughters of Pierus, who, in their presumption, imagined themselves \softline
better singers than the Muses themselves and challenged them to a vocal contest.  Unwisely, they \softline
chose to sing of the rebellion of the giants (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.91-96); the Muses sang of the goodness \softline
of goddesses (Ceres and Proserpina).  In Ovid's world of divine assertion and vengeance, it is not \softline
difficult to imagine who won.  The nine girls were turned into raucous-sounding magpies.  \softline
Identifying himself with the pious Calliope, Dante, fully aware of his potential presumption in \softline
singing the world of God's justice, makes a gesture of humility.  That precarious balance that a \softline
poet of divine revelation must manage is never far from his (or our) concern.  It will return as an \softline
even more evident and central concern at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.91-108.  (For discussion of Dante's \softline
invocations see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.7-9.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Calliope is asked to rise up somewhat more than her eight sisters, perhaps indicating her \softline
slight superiority to them or the relative higher poetic level of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to that of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (yet \softline
not as high as that of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  still to come).  Poletto{\u8219\'27}s commentary to these verses  was \softline
perhaps the first to point out that Dante had used the phrase 'sermo Calliopeus' (my words in \softline
verse) to refer to his own appended sonnet in a letter to Cino da Pistoia (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.2).  See the \softline
further discussion in Ignazio Baldelli (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e Francesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1999]), p. 86.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The words }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 morta poes{\f3 \'58}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in verse 7 continue to cause occasional puzzlement.  Do they \softline
mean 'dead poetry' (i.e., poetry that had died with the ancients and now is making a return under \softline
the pen of Dante)?  Or does it mean 'poetry of the dead' (i.e., poetry concerned with the souls of \softline
the damned)?  The commentary tradition is enlightening.  All the earliest commentators supported \softline
the second interpretation.  It was only among 'prehumanist' commentators and those who wrote in \softline
the Renaissance (e.g., Pietro di Dante [Pietro1 to these verses], Benvenuto da Imola [to vv. 7-9], \softline
Vellutello [also to vv. 7-9]) that a 'humanist' reading is found, one that selects the first alternative.  \softline
From the eighteenth century on nearly every commentator prefers the reading found in our \softline
translation: Dante's poetry will rise from the subject of damned souls to sing those of the saved.  \softline
But for recent support of the 'humanist' reading see Marino Balducci ("Il preludio purgatoriale e la \softline
fenomenologia del sinfonismo dantesco: percorso ermeneutico," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Publications of the Carla Rossi \softline
Academy Press in Affiliation with the University of Connecticut}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 1999), p. 13.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The exordium and invocation combined, what we would call the introduction to this \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , occupy a mere twelve lines, where in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  they require thirty-six.  The narrative \softline
begins with two noun phrases (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dolce color}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 or{\f3 \'56}ental zaffiro}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [sweet color, oriental sapphire]) \softline
that we would not expect to find in a description of anything seen in hell.  This part of God's \softline
kingdom, for all the pain of penance put forward in it, is a brighter, happier place.  Carol Ann \softline
Cioffi ({\u8220\'93}{\u8216\'91}Dolce color d{\u8217\'92}or{\f3 \'56}ental zaffiro,{\u8217\'92} a Gloss on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1.13,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Philology}{\plain \fs24 \f1  82 \softline
[1985], pp. 355-64) argues for a biblical source of Dante's gemstone (Exodus 24:10): the paved \softline
sapphire beneath the feet of God when Moses and the seventy elders look upon Him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the sapphire in medieval gemology see Levavasseur ("Les pierres pr{\f2\u233\'e9}cieuses dans la \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine Com{\f2\u233\'e9}die}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Revue des {\f2\u233\'e9}tudes italiennes }{\plain \fs24 \f1 4 [1957]), pp. 57-59, indicating the stone's usual \softline
association with the Virgin.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 14-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mezzo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here has caused some problems.  It would seem to mean the air \softline
between the lunar sphere and earth, that is, the 'middle zone' between the first (lunar) celestial \softline
sphere and the surface of the earth.  For Dante's own words to this effect see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.ix.12.  
There is also debate as to whether the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giro}{\plain \fs24 \f1  refers to this first heavenly sphere or to the circle \softline
of the horizon.  In the eighteenth century Lombardi (comm. to vv. 13-18) proposed that the \softline
Starry Sphere was meant, but this has seemed preposterous to most, if not all, who have \softline
considered his notion.  Just about every other commentator who had dealt with the problem for \softline
550 years had solved it by saying that Dante was referring to the sphere of the Moon.  Then, \softline
perhaps beginning with Bianchi in 1868, the choice suddenly swerved to the earth's horizon \softline
(comm. to I.15).  In the past century and a third, some 80% of the commentators are solidly in \softline
this corner.  The main reasons for preferring the horizon of the earth to the sphere of the Moon \softline
are either that Dante did not believe that there was an atmosphere that reached as high as that \softline
sphere or that one could not make out anything at that distance if there were.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The planet is Venus, whose astral influence 'emboldens love.'  The rest of the \softline
tercet makes clear what sort of love: her brightness is veiling, as the dawn nears, the constellation \softline
Pisces (the fish was one of early Christianity's most frequent symbols for Christ, who asked his \softline
disciples to become 'fishers of men' [Matthew 4:19]).  Further, she is making the east seem to \softline
smile by her beauty, the east in which the sun is about to appear, a second reference to one of the \softline
constant images for Christ, the rising sun.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This tercet has caused consternation in some readers ever since scholars understood that \softline
in the spring of 1300 Venus was not the morning star, in conjunction with Pisces, but the evening \softline
star, in conjunction with Taurus.  For one way to resolve this difficulty see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: A \softline
Life in Works}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001)], p. 196: 'Emmanuel Poulle's article \softline
'Profacio' (ED.1973.4, p. 693) sketches out, with bibliographical indications, the central position \softline
of his study of the problem: Dante took his star charts from the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Almanach}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Prophacius Judaeus \softline
(ca. 1236-1304).  The astronomical data found in the poem correspond only to the stars' positions \softline
during the dates 25 March-2 April 1301.  If Poulle is right, Dante has privileged those dates in the \softline
calendar.  As for 1301, it is inconceivable that the reader is supposed to believe that the date \softline
within the poem is other than 1300.  However, if Dante was using Profacius's work, the star \softline
charts for 1300 fail to include data for the Sun and for Venus; Dante found March dates for them \softline
only in the charts for 1301.  Since it took 700 years for someone to catch him out, we might \softline
surmise that, rather than calculate the missing data himself, he simply appropriated the charts for \softline
1301 to his use.'  For the countering view that we are to understand that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 actual}{\plain \fs24 \f1  date of the \softline
voyage is 1301 see Giovangualberto Ceri ("L'Astrologia in Dante e la datazione del 'viaggio' \softline
dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  15 (2000), pp. 27-57), restating and refining his various previous \softline
insistences on this redating.  And now, also arguing for 1301 as the date of the vision, see the first \softline
study collected in Dante Balboni's book of essays (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 "La Divinia Commedia," poema liturgico del \softline
primo Giubileo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Citt{\f3 \'42} del Vaticano: Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 1999]).  For still another \softline
accountancy of the calendar for the action of the poem, see Adriana Mitescu ("La }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina \softline
Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  quale itinerario pasquale nel Santo Sepolcro di Gerusalemme," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  17 [2001]), \softline
pp. 37-40; according to her this begins on 24 March, the anniversary of the last day of Jesus's \softline
thirty-third year, 6499 years after the creation of Adam.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Moore's discussion of the problem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Fourth Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Textual Criticism of \softline
the "Convivio" and Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1917)], pp. 276-79), is \softline
based on the possibility that Dante misread the data in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Almanach}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and actually believed that \softline
Venus had been in Pisces in 1300.  Moore's argument is somewhat weakened by his view that the \softline
action of the poem began on 8 April rather than 25 March (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.1).  Nonetheless, 
his conclusion, that the internal date of the vision is 1300, remains difficult to disprove (see \softline
Edward Moore, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Third Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 \softline
(1903)], pp. 144-77).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Turning to face the south, even though he is at the antipodes, whence every \softline
direction is up, Dante looks at the heavens over the southern hemisphere and sees four stars not \softline
seen before except by Adam and Eve.  Various other explanations of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 prima gente}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (those first \softline
on earth) have been offered, the main one being that they were the inhabitants of the classical \softline
Golden Age.  However, if one has to be in this spot to see these four stars, the only people ever to \softline
see them were, in consequence, the first two human souls, for once they fell from grace, they \softline
(mysteriously -- and Dante never confronts the issue) ended up somewhere around Mesopotamia, \softline
and there began populating the earth with humankind.  Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)]), pp. 146-55, argues well for this view, \softline
basing his sense of the passage in what he considers Dante's understanding of the older Latin \softline
version of Genesis 3:24, in which Adam (as well as Eve) was sent 'opposite Eden' right after he \softline
fell, i.e., into the antipodal hemisphere.  And thus only Adam and Eve knew these stars.  For the \softline
view, dependent upon a complex and risky series of asseverations, that the phrase refers to 'gli \softline
Antichi Romani,' see Cono A. Mangieri (}{\plain \fs26 \f1\fs26 "Dante e la sua 'prima gente,'" }{\plain \fs26 \i\f1\fs26 Testo}{\plain \fs26 \f1\fs26  29-30 [1995], \softline
pp. 72-103).}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab That the four stars may represent the Southern Cross has long been considered a \softline
possibility.  But how could Dante have known of them?  Portirelli, ca. 1805, in a lengthy, original, \softline
and fascinating passage in his commentary (to vv. 22-30) speculates that Marco Polo, returned to \softline
Venice from his quarter century's sojourn in the Far East in 1295, was Dante's source.  One can \softline
surely believe that Dante at least heard from others some of what the voyager reported.  \softline
Nonetheless, neither Marco nor his book is ever mentioned by Dante.  See Giuliano Bertuccioli, \softline
'Polo, Marco' (ED.1973.4), p. 589.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Whatever the literal significance of these stars, their symbolic valence seems plain, and has \softline
so from the time of the earliest commentators: they represent the four moral (or cardinal) virtues: \softline
prudence, justice, fortitude, and temperance.  What is important to understand (and for a fine \softline
exposition of the point in one of the most helpful essays on Dante's Cato ever written, see Proto \softline
[{\u8220\'93}Nuove ricerche sul Catone dantesco,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  59 (1912), pp. \softline
193-248]) is that these virtues were infused and not earned -- which again points to Adam and \softline
Eve, the only humans born before Christ who had the virtues infused in their very making.  In his \softline
commentary to these verses, Vellutello both insists on Adam and Eve as the 'first people' and \softline
nearly gives expression to the fact that, in them, these virtues were infused.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 26.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Our northern hemisphere is 'widowed,' deprived of the sight of these stars, because, as \softline
Chiavacci Leonardi suggests in her commentary (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Milan: Mondadori, 1994]), it is like the 'widowed' Jerusalem of Jeremiah (1:1), separated \softline
permanently from its original condition of unalloyed goodness (the condition, we may sometimes \softline
forget, that preceded that of original sin).  Those who argue that our 'widowhood' signifies that \softline
we know no goodness are defeated by the fact that some humans are indeed virtuous.  What we \softline
have lost is more primitive and total than acquired virtue: absolute innocence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Mario Casella ({\u8220\'93}Interpretazioni: I. La figura simbolica di Catone,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  28 \softline
[1949], pp. 183-95.), argues that the southern sky represents the Christian active life, one of 
permanent prayer, while the northern heavens stand for our mortal life in consequence of the first \softline
sin.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 29-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante looks north now, where the Big Dipper ('the Wain') is not seeable, given the \softline
fact that it is above the equator.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The solitary figure of Cato is never named in the two cantos in which he appears (he \softline
was, however, referred to by name in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.15).  Emerging details make his identity \softline
unmistakable.  It would seem that Dante was fully aware of the puzzlement and outrage his \softline
salvation of Cato would cause; he thus apparently chose to leave the detective work to us, forcing \softline
us to acknowledge, from the details that he presents, that this is indeed the soul of Cato of Utica \softline
(95-46 B.C.), saved despite his suicide and his opposition to Julius Caesar, a sin in the last canto \softline
that damned Brutus and Cassius to the lowest zone of hell. (On this problem see Pasquazi \softline
[{\u8220\'93}Catone,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cultura e scuola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13-14 (1965)], pp. 529-33.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 'Marcus Porcius Cato Uticensis, great-grandson of Cato the Censor, born B.C. 95; \softline
brought up as a devoted adherent of the Stoic school, he became conspicuous for his rigid \softline
morality.  On the outbreak of the civil war in 49 he sided with Pompey; after the battle of \softline
Pharsalia he joined Metellus Scipio in Africa; when the latter was defeated at Thapsus, and all of \softline
Africa, with the exception of Utica, submitted to Caesar, he resolved to die rather than to fall into \softline
Caesar's hands; he therefore put to an end his own life, after spending the greater part of the night \softline
in reading Plato's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phaedo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  on the immortality of the soul, B.C. 46' (Paget Toynbee, "Catone," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is vital to understand that no one other than Dante was of the opinion that Cato was \softline
saved.  And that he is so to be construed escapes most early (and many later) commentators, who \softline
balk at this simple but offending notion and thus attempt to deal with Cato as an abstract quality \softline
rather than as a historical figure.  Pietro di Dante's gloss (1340) to vv. 85-90 is one of the few \softline
places in which one may find a clear statement of the better view: Christ harrowed Cato from hell \softline
along with the faithful Hebrews; the Holy Spirit inspired Cato to believe in Christ to come and to \softline
seek absolution for his sins -- or so Dante would like us to believe.  Bruno Porcelli cites a passage \softline
in Pietro's commentary (Pietro1 to vv. 31-33), in a partial and thus misleading way, to show that \softline
Cato is not treated by Pietro as a real person, but as an allegory.  Here is the passage from which \softline
he cites: 'Tertio fingit apparere sibi umbram Catonis Uticensis, in quo figurat virtutem et \softline
honestatem; quae honestas habet nos primo dirigere ad virtuosa,...' a remark that clearly indicates \softline
that Pietro is treating Cato as an historical figure.  But here is all that Porcelli cites: 'in quo \softline
[Dante] figurat virtutem et honestatem.'  This misrepresents somewhat the context of Pietro's \softline
remark, since it is the historical Cato in whom Dante {\u8220\'93}figures{\u8221\'94} virtue and uprightness.  Further, \softline
Pietro later in his commentary (Pietro1, comm. to I.85-90) says this about Cato: 'cum Christus \softline
eum liberavit a limbo, idest ab obscuritate verae salutis; cum possibile sit et verisimile Deum, qui \softline
fecit eum tantum virtuosum, inspirasse ei credulitatem Christi filii venturi, et contritum decessisse, \softline
et sic salvatum.'  This happens to be one of the most radical and positive early commentaries on \softline
Dante{\u8217\'92}s Cato that one can find, for it insists on the harrowing of Cato by Christ and his true \softline
Christianity.  To underline the heterodox nature of even Dante's son's view of Cato, it is worth \softline
consulting St. Thomas's flat denial of Cato's eventual worth when, commenting upon the gospel \softline
of John (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 In Ioan. evangel}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.iii.5, cited in Singleton's commentary (to verse 38), he specifically \softline
denies that Cato could have acted, despite his apparently virtuous behavior, out of more than a 
desire for fame, since he, like all the damned virtuous pagans, 'did not worship God aright' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IV.38).  Dante's verse is possibly a translation of Aquinas's conclusion about Cato and other \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 infideles}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : 'quia Deo cultum debitum non reddebant' (because they did not pay due honor to God).  \softline
On the other hand, Scott (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Political Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania \softline
Press, 1996]), pp. 76-78, argues that it is precisely upon Aquinas's view that pagans could be \softline
saved by implicit faith that Dante's salvation of Cato is based.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 32-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Such strongly worded phrases of praise indicate the strength (and striking \softline
strangeness) of Dante's personal sense of identity with Cato.  For some of his previous and later \softline
enthusiastic }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 encomia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Cato the Younger see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.xxviii.13-19 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.v.15-17.  And for the possibility that Dante saw in Virgil's line describing Cato, which appears in the \softline
description of the shield of Aeneas at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.670, his own name coupled with Cato's, see \softline
Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), pp. \softline
128-29: 'his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 m iura }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Catone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 m' ([italics added] and Cato giving them the laws).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   According to Lucan (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.372-376) Cato, sickened with sadness by the \softline
Caesar-inspired civil war in Rome, let his hair and beard grow untrimmed as a sign of grief.  While \softline
he was only in his forties when he fought for the republican cause, Dante chooses to emphasize \softline
his age.  However, and as Singleton says in his comment to verse 31, 'it should be remembered \softline
that for Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 la senettute}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (old age) begins at forty-six (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.xxiv.4).'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the resemblances to Moses in Dante's portrait of Cato see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in \softline
Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), pp. 124-26, and Carol \softline
Kaske ("Mount Sinai and Dante's Mount Purgatory," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  89 [1971]), pp. 2-3, 12-15.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The general sense is clear: Cato's face is shining with light.  Is this true because the \softline
four stars irradiate his face as though they were a sun shining upon him (the more usual \softline
interpretation), or is Dante saying that it was as though, in the brightness of Cato's face, the sun \softline
were shining before }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 him}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ?  In our translation we have followed the majority view, convinced that \softline
the truncated grammatical logic of the line invites completion with 'Cato' rather than 'myself.'  \softline
However, we were tempted by the minority view (restated by Pompeo Giannantonio ["Canto I," \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Neapolitana: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Pompeo Giannantonio [Naples: Loffredo, \softline
1989], pp. 14-15), encouraged by, among other things, the fact that Dante had described the face \softline
of Lady Philosophy in the last ode of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (III.O.4) as overcoming our understanding as the \softline
sun overcomes weak sight.  Since the next canto will introduce the text of the second ode from \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  for our consideration, it may be worth considering the appropriateness of that image to \softline
this scene.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Cato's initial rigid and probing moral attitude may seem to indicate that he does \softline
not immediately understand the very grace that has brought him here.  He reasons that Dante and \softline
Virgil, not arriving at his shores in the 'normal' way (disembarking from the angel's ship that we \softline
shall see in the next canto), may have snuck into this holy land.  He intuits that they have come up \softline
from the stream (the eventual course of Lethe?) that descends into hell (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.129-132) \softline
and is eager to know how they could have done so without a very special grace indeed.  \softline
Nonetheless, in a manner totally unlike that encountered in the demons of Inferno, he at once \softline
allows for the possibility of grace.  His second tercet immediately reveals what a different place 
we have now reached, one in which doubt and possibility exist even in the minds of its sternest \softline
keepers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   His second set of questions maintains a similar balance: 'Are you here because \softline
some newfangled ordinance of hell permits it, or has Heaven decreed a new law, permitting such \softline
unusual travel, that has been superimposed upon the New Law made by Christ?'  That he refers to \softline
the cliffs of purgatory as his own shows that he is the keeper of the whole mountain, not just of its \softline
shore, a matter that used to cause debate.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Cato's queries finally bring Virgil into the conversation.  It is probably significant \softline
that the opening splendors of this Christian realm have been presented for Dante's sake alone.  \softline
Only now does Virgil resume his role as guide.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The 'signs' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cenni}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) with which he encourages his charge are probably facial gestures.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's response echoes Dante's to Cavalcante de' Cavalcanti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.61): 'Da me \softline
stesso non vegno' (I come not on my own).  There Dante reveals his debt to Virgil; here Virgil \softline
owns his subservience to Beatrice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's insistence on Dante's near-death condition at the outset of the poem may \softline
remind us of the possible connection between that condition and suicide (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XIII.24).  The reflections of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I and XIII in this canto, presided over by the 'good' suicide, \softline
Cato, may produce an overtone of this concern.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In the writings of St. Augustine (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De civitate Dei}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.17, I.20, cited by Benvenuto [comm. to \softline
I.28-33]) Dante might have found both a way to understand certain acts of suicide positively \softline
(when 'by divine inspiration it happens that the act gives an example of fortitude in the disdain for \softline
death') and a specific denial that Cato's was such an act (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 DcD}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.23, where Cato's suicide is \softline
regarded as deriving from weakness and not from fortitude).  Has Dante perversely conflated \softline
these two opinions, disagreeing with their author by making Cato the positive exemplar whom we \softline
find here?  Augustine himself later comes back to the problem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 DcD}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.4) when he asks, 'Was it \softline
fortitude or weakness that prompted Cato to kill himself?'  Augustine clearly implies that it was \softline
weakness; Dante, if he was thinking of the passage, might have smiled at the opening that the very \softline
question allowed a later student of the question.  And then this would be another example of \softline
Dante's continuing debate with the Bishop of Hippo over the meaning of Roman history, which \softline
Augustine sees as without redeeming value, while Dante believes it essential to our understanding \softline
of God's purposes in the world.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Virgil's ascription of Dante's proximity to death to his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 follia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  may also remind the reader of \softline
Ulysses' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 folle volo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.125 -- the last text in which we have seen the word in its adjectival \softline
or nominal form).  The younger Dante may have attempted to exercise options that he now \softline
regards as self-destructive.  Cantos I, XIII, XXVI, and XXXIV of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  are perhaps those most \softline
present from that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the verses of this opening canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That all the souls on the mountain are seen as being in Cato's charge makes it close to \softline
impossible to assign him a partial role, as do even some commentators who treat him as historical \softline
and not an allegory, one in which he has authority only over the entrance at the shore or over that \softline
and the 'vestibule' (ante-purgatory).  He seems rather to be the guardian, appointed by God, of the 
entire mountain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 68.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'power' that leads Virgil from above was apparent to him when he first saw \softline
Beatrice in Limbo and she was 'donna di virt{\f3 \'6a}' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.76).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 71-74.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's phrasing, which makes freedom (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 libert{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) the key word connecting Dante \softline
and Cato, may also remind the reader of Christ, who gave His life for our freedom.  For perhaps \softline
the first substantial understanding that there are significant figural relations between Christ and \softline
Cato see Raimondi ("Rito e storia nel I canto del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metafora e storia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: \softline
Einaudi, 1970 (1962)]), pp. 78-83; for the compelling further notion that Dante would have seen \softline
confirmation of exactly such a reading in the text of Lucan itself, see Raimondi, "Rito e storia," p. \softline
80, and {\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto I,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le Monnier, 1967),  p. 21, \softline
highlighting Cato's words (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.312): 'Hic redimat sanguis populos' (and let my blood ransom \softline
the people).  Barberi Squarotti eventually summarized this view as follows: 'Cato, finally, comes \softline
to take on the function of a lay }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 figura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Christ' ({\u8220\'93}Ai piedi del monte: il prologo del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L{\u8217\'92}arte dell{\u8217\'92}interpretare: studi critici offerti a Giovanni Getto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: L{\u8217\'92}Arciere, 1984]), p. 33.  \softline
See also, in this vein, Wetherbee ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Poeta che mi guidi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Dante, Lucan, and Virgil," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Canons}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. \softline
R. Von Hallberg [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984]), p. 135.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The contributions of Raimondi to a better understanding of Dante's Cato, seen as a \softline
historical being rather than as an abstraction (e.g., the Ottimo's 'Solicitude' or Landino's and \softline
Vellutello's 'Liberty'), are of great importance and have been influential.  See, for example, \softline
Edoardo Sanguineti ({\u8220\'93}Dante, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1970]), pp. 267-69.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This line is so clear in its prediction of Cato's eventual salvation, when he will receive \softline
his glorified body in the general resurrection of the just that will follow the Last Judgment, that \softline
one has difficulty accepting Pasquazi's claim that the issue of Cato's salvation is left unresolved \softline
({\u8220\'93}Catone,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cultura e scuola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13-14 (1965), p. 534).  Pasquazi is closer to the mark than Andreoli \softline
(comm. to this verse), who simply denies the possibility that Cato could be saved, arguing that \softline
Dante provides no grounds by which we might accept such a view.  This is but another example \softline
of how the force of Dante's daring treatment of Cato has escaped his readers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 77.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's self-serving reference to the fact that he was not an active sinner temporarily \softline
hides the further fact that he is damned.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 78-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's attempt at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 captatio benevolentiae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the winning of an audience's goodwill) \softline
probably sounds reasonable enough to most readers (for instance, Gabriele Muresu ["Il 'sacrificio' \softline
per la libert{\f3 \'42} (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Rassegna della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  105 (2001), pp. 357-403], p. \softline
395).  Since he dwells in Limbo with Marcia, Cato's wife, he seeks to sway him with reference to \softline
her.  Virgil has learned, we might reflect, how }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 captatio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  functions in a Christian context from \softline
Beatrice, who practiced it upon him (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.58-60; II.73-74).  If such rhetoric worked on him, he \softline
would seem to have surmised, perhaps it will now be effective with Cato.  However, and as \softline
Arnaldo Di Benedetto ("Simboli e moralit{\f3 \'42} nel II canto del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della \softline
letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  162 [1985]), p. 175, has noted, 'the mention of Marcia was something of a \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 gaffe}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 .'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Cato's rebuke of Virgil is gentle but firm: (1) Marcia pleased me well enough when \softline
I was mortal, but after I was harrowed from Limbo by Christ (the maker of the 'New Law') pity \softline
for the damned was no longer possible for me; (2) Beatrice's having interceded for you is all that \softline
is required -- there is no need for flattery.  Cato, unlike Orpheus, will not look back for his dead \softline
wife.  He would seem rather to have Christ's words in mind: 'For in the resurrection they neither \softline
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven' (Matthew 22:30), a \softline
passage Dante cites later in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.137).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Cato's characterization of Virgil's words as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lusinghe}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (flatteries) is harsh, but justified by \softline
Virgil's error.  The name that would have worked (and still does) is Beatrice's, not Marcia's.  \softline
Virgil has relied upon the power of the spiritually dead when he should have appealed to that of \softline
the saved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Turning from his admonition (which would have seemed gratuitous had the author \softline
not wanted to call Virgil's sense of the situation into question), Cato now orders the Roman poet \softline
to gird Dante's loins with a symbol of humility.  Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.134-136) refers to the sixth chapter of Matthew (he means Micah [6:14]): 'humiliatio tua in medio tui,' \softline
what Singleton (comm. to I.95) calls the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cingulum humilitatis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Dante's confirmation in humility \softline
must be joined with his purification (the cleansing of his face) so that he be pure in sight when he \softline
stands before the 'admitting angel' at the gate of purgatory in Canto IX.  For the reflection of the \softline
baptismal liturgy in vv. 98-99 see Kevin Marti, "Dante's 'Baptism' and the Theology of the Body \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1-2,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Traditio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  45 (1989/90), pp. 167-90.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giunco schietto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (verse 95), the rush with which Virgil is ordered to bind his pupil, is, \softline
as Tommaseo was perhaps the first to suggest (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.94-96), meant to echo positively \softline
the horrible vegetation of the forest of the suicides (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.5), described as having branches that \softline
are }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  straight ('non rami schietti'), but contorted.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Cato points Virgil (and Dante) toward a descent to the very shore of the island, \softline
its lowest point, truly a descent into humility, where the only vegetation is this most modest of \softline
plants, characterized by its plainness and its pliancy, and by its ability to grow in a landscape \softline
inhospitable to any other form of life.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 107-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The guardian's reference to the nascent sunrise reminds us that this scene, until \softline
now, has been played in the hour just before dawn.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante has been kneeling all through this scene (see verse 51) and only now arises.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's remark indicates that this is literally a descent to a lower place; \softline
metaphorically it would surely also seem to be a 'descent into humility' for Dante.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The beginning of this dawn, Easter Sunday 1300, resonates, as Tommaseo \softline
(comm. to these verses) was perhaps the first to notice, with a similar phrasing from Virgil, \softline
'splendet tremulo sub lumine pontus' (the sea gleams beneath her flickering light -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.9).  \softline
The scene is the departure of Aeneas as he resumes his voyage toward Latium, but the source of \softline
that light is the moon, not the sun.  In both works the passage marks a boundary of importance, \softline
the beginning of the 'Iliadic' second half of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and the preparation for Dante's journey 
upward toward God's kingdom.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The comparison equates the protagonist and his guide alike with a person who \softline
finds the necessary (and hitherto obscured) path; yet we surely reflect that it applies far more \softline
forcefully to Dante, who is reported as having lost the true way at the poem's beginning ('ch{\f2\u233\'e9} la \softline
diritta via era smarrita' -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.3), and who now, and only now, is back on the path toward \softline
salvation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The adjective 'solingo' (solitary, lonely) underlines the separation of the two travelers from \softline
the presence of Cato, who has fulfilled his mission and set them on their way.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That is, once they had gotten closer to the sea, where the maritime breeze \softline
protects the dew from the heat of the sun more than it does higher up the slope.  There is debate \softline
over whether Dante meant to say 'ad orezza' or 'adorezza'; the second reading would translate as \softline
'where there is shadow,' but most contemporary students of the problem have gone back to the \softline
early commentators' reading of the line, where 'orezza' is a diminutive of the noun 'ora' when it has \softline
the meaning of 'breeze.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's cleansing of Dante's face removed the dark stain of the sins of hell from \softline
his visage and restored his white, or innocent (and faithful?), countenance.  That we should think \softline
of the rite of baptism here may have been suggested by Benvenuto da Imola, whose gloss to vv. \softline
121-125 refers to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rugiada}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (dew) as the 'dew of divine grace, abundant when men humble their \softline
hearts before God and are cleansed of their habitual sinfulness.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to I.134-136) was the first (and remains one of the \softline
relative few) of the poem's commentators to insist on the redoing here of Aeneas's self-cleansing \softline
when he enters the Elysian fields (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.635-636), a natural association for Dante to have had \softline
in mind.  He too is entering a better precinct, having turned his attention away from 'Tartarus,' the \softline
place of the wicked.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reminiscence of Ulysses here has had a recent surge of appreciation, but \softline
notice of it is as ancient as the commentary of Benvenuto da Imola (followed, as he often was, by \softline
John of Serravalle).  As Rigo ("Tra 'maligno' e 'sanguigno,'" in her }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Memoria classica e memoria \softline
biblica in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1994]), p. 48, points out, Benvenuto (comm. to these \softline
verses), citing St. Augustine's opinion (in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De civitate Dei}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), says that no one had ever lived at the \softline
antipodes who ever returned from there; he goes on to suggest that this passage reflects the failed \softline
voyage of Ulysses.  Some recent writers have also pointed out that the rhyme words in the \softline
passage (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 diserto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 esperto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 acque}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 piacque}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nacque}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) are also found in the Ulysses passage (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVI.98f., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.137f.).  For the former see Thompson (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Epic Journeys}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Baltimore: \softline
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974]), p. 47; for the latter Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New \softline
Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990]), p. 32.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-136.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The triumphant wonder of the little miracle of the Christlike humble reed that \softline
renews itself concludes the canto with a proper Christian note.  For Pasquazi ({\u8220\'93}Catone,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cultura \softline
e scuola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13-14 [1965)]), p. 537, the reed 'expresses the beginning of an inner renewal, through \softline
which the poet, holding to the way of humility, opens himself to a new life.'  This canto is thus a \softline
canto of two 'suicides,' Cato and Jesus, each of whom voluntarily gave his life so that others might 
be free.  For the way in which this scene counters the images of suicide found in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIII.31-32, see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1969]), pp. 129-31.  In the earlier scene Dante, under Virgil's orders, breaks off a twig from the \softline
thornbush that is the damned soul of Pier della Vigna.  Bits broken from some of the suicides do \softline
not grow back (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.141-142), but strew the forest floor.  Here the humble plant does \softline
indeed regrow.  Wetherbee ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Poeta che mi guidi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Dante, Lucan, and Virgil," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Canons}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. R. \softline
Von Hallberg [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984], pp. 37-38, makes a similar \softline
observation.  Pasquini ("Il }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  e una nuova idea di figuralismo," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Intersezioni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  16 [1996]), pp. \softline
421-22, studies still other connections between Cato and Pier, underlined by precise verbal \softline
echoes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab However, the major reference here is, as the early commentators were quick to realize, to \softline
the golden bough in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VI.143-144): 'Primo avulso non deficit alter / aureus' (when the \softline
first is plucked, a second, golden too, does not fail to take its place).  That scene offers a fitting \softline
parallel to this one, but with a major and governing difference: the classical object is artificial and \softline
precious, while the Christian one is natural and of little worth.  Thus does the humility that \softline
inspires the Christian sublime help it outdo its classical forebear.\par
}}