{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 16}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 \ul0 \tab 1-7.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This fiftieth canto of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is literally its darkest; light finally \softline
glimmers only two lines from its conclusion (in verse 143) and its action is played completely in \softline
the smoke of Wrath.  Technically, the numerical midpoint of the poem occurs between Cantos \softline
XVI and XVII, the latter of which also happens to be the middle canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Thus, as \softline
the poet prepares the entire poem and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to reach their centers, it seems fitting that he \softline
first indicates the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 's origin in hell: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Buio d'inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Gloom of hell).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The sky is 'barren' (literally 'poor,' or 'impoverished') in that it is 'deprived of its precious \softline
jewels,' its stars (according to Benvenuto da Imola [comm. to vv. 1-6]), mainly found in the \softline
eighth sphere, but with one 'planet' found in each of the first seven), are hidden behind layers of \softline
clouds.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The envious are made to repent by being denied their sight; the wrathful are being denied \softline
objects of sight because they were blinded by their anger for their enemies.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 \ul0 \tab 8-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It seems that here Virgil has the power of sight, while the protagonist, like the \softline
penitents soon to be present, is effectively blind in the smoke.  Is this a deliberate recasting of the \softline
situation in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.115-138, where Dante can behold the ecstatic visions apparently \softline
denied to Virgil?  Once again, Virgil's state would be marked off as different from that of saved \softline
souls.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The smoke that expresses the sin of Wrath on this terrace is referred to five times \softline
(XV.142; XVI.5, 25, 35, 142) and marks the last time in the poem that the noun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fummo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is used to \softline
describe a place.  It clearly seems to be related to the smoke that marked the Circle of Anger in \softline
Inferno, where it is used three times, once (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.75) with an adjective, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 acerbo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (harsh), that \softline
seems to join it to the smoke we enter here.  For the relationship between infernal anger and the \softline
purgation of Wrath see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII.19-39.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The simile presents an image of Dante walking behind Virgil with his hand upon \softline
the shoulder of his guide, otherwise present to him only as a voice.  The image prepares us for \softline
what will happen once Marco Lombardo is his interlocutor: all he (and we) will be aware of is a \softline
voice, close to an ideal situation for a poet to contrive in order to gain undeflected attention on \softline
behalf of a presentation of moral philosophy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We are presumably meant to understand that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 all}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the penitents pray on each of the \softline
previous terraces (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.1-24; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.49-51) and on this one as well.  The pattern of \softline
communal liturgical prayer will be broken, for good reason, only by the slothful: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XVIII.103-105.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Fallani (comm. to verse 19) discusses the prayer, instituted as part of the Mass by Pope \softline
Sergius I in the seventh century, comprised, once it became a part of the liturgy, of a single line \softline
that is then twice repeated: 'Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis' (Lamb of God \softline
who carry off the sins of the world, have mercy on us); in the third iteration the last phrase \softline
('miserere nobis') gives place to the words 'dona nobis pacem' (grant us peace), a particularly apt \softline
phrase for these penitents of Wrath, beseeching the serenity to which Virgil referred in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XV.131, 'the waters of peace.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The speaker can sense that the visitor is moving the smoke that he walks through \softline
and thus must be present in the flesh; for this reason, as he correctly assumes, the new arrival is \softline
still timebound.  The souls on the mountain have their own temporality, but one in which all of \softline
time is but a necessary prolegomenon to eternity, when real life begins for them.  Thus for them \softline
the months of the calendar are real but meaningless.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 captatio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , his attempt to gain his listener's goodwill (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
II.58) celebrates the as yet unknown speaker's freedom from the flesh; his (rational) soul will soon \softline
be as it was when God breathed it into him (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXV.70-75).  The protagonist goes on to \softline
offer, in good rhetorical fashion, a reward for his auditor's collaboration.  His insistence that this \softline
spirit follow him is predicated upon necessity: Dante's eyes are closed because his mortal flesh \softline
cannot bear the harshness of the smoke, with the result that he cannot see his interlocutor.  The \softline
spirit, unlike Virgil, evidently cannot see in the darkness and therefore is only able to follow \softline
Dante's voice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-38.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The image of the flesh as swaddling clothes, the protective cloth in which infants \softline
are wrapped, places emphasis on the soul as being the precious part of us, our bodies merely the \softline
wrapping that should keep it until it is ready for its better life.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 41-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the rather coy way that Dante refers to St. Paul's ascent to Heaven (II \softline
Corinthians 12:4) as being the last before his own.  For Dante, that somewhat strange word \softline
('modern') is not a positive one.  (The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Grande Dizionario}{\plain \fs24 \f1  indicates this as the first recorded use of \softline
the word in Italian.)  For Dante, in the battle between ancients and moderns, at least when it is \softline
waged on moral grounds, ancients are better.  For the three subsequent uses of the word see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.113, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI.33, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.131.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Marco the Lombard: to the many previous attempts to identify Marco (see Singleton's \softline
commentary to this verse) we must now add that of Giorgio Cracco ("Tra Marco e Marco: un \softline
cronista veneziano dietro al canto XVI del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ?" in AA. VV., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Viridarium floridum: Studi \softline
di storia veneta offerti dagli allievi a Paolo Sambin}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a cura di M.C. Billanovich, G. Cracco, A. \softline
Rigon [Padua: Antenore, 1984], pp. 3-23.), who points out that a Venetian living in Lombardy \softline
wrote, ca. 1292, a (still unpublished) chronicle of the provinces of Venice.  He names himself \softline
simply as 'Marco' and his text contains a number of concerns and phrases that coincide with \softline
Dante's.  That Dante allows him as limited identification as he does may indicate that he felt \softline
Marco's fame was great enough that his Christian name alone was sufficient to identify him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 47-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Marco's words make him seem a perfect courtier: worldly, but a lover of the good, \softline
and a user of soldier's language (that of bowmanship).  Poletto (comm. to vv. 46-49) also points \softline
out that his qualities would seem to mirror those of Ulysses -- or at least those that Ulysses lends \softline
himself, his 'fervor... to gain experience of the world and learn about man's vices, and his worth' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.97-99).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Strangely enough, some commentators have taken the adverbial preposition }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 s{\f3 \'6a}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(above) to refer to the world at the antipodes (e.g., John of Serravalle [comm. to vv. 49-51]) and \softline
one (Tommaseo [comm. to vv. 49-51]), to the earthly paradise.  However, it seems unmistakably 
clear that Marco, having learned of Dante's destination (verse 41), is the first spirit to ask him to \softline
pray for him once he is in Heaven.  This request might seem to imply either that he is of a \softline
particularly holy disposition or that he believes that no one on earth whom Dante might meet \softline
loves anything that transcends the earthly (verse 48).  But see Guido Guinizzelli's similar request \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.127-130).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 53-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante is bursting with a doubt, now made double by Marco's words: if the world \softline
is so thoroughly evil, wherein lies the cause?  Dante wants to be informed so that he may pass the \softline
knowledge on to others, some of whom believe the cause is found on earth, while others think it \softline
is situated in the heavens.  Is his doubt now 'double' because he has heard from Guido del Duca \softline
(XIV.37-42) that all in the valley of the Arno flee virtue?  That is Benvenuto's reasonable \softline
hypothesis (comm. to vv. 52-57), one that has many followers.  Wanting to know the 'cause' of \softline
evil (and his word, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 malizia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [malice], is the word used in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.22 to define the sins of the \softline
hardened will [see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.22-27], those punished within the City of Dis), the \softline
protagonist triggers the heaviest use of this noun (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cagione}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in the poem; it occurs four times in 44 \softline
lines, at vv. 61, 67, 83, and 104, thus underlining the centrality of this concern, to understand the \softline
root of human sinfulness, essential to the understanding of the concept of free will, as the next \softline
passage (Marco's rejoinder) and the next canto, when Virgil discourses on the nature of love, will \softline
both make plain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Marco's earlier view of human depravity is obviously now deepened by the \softline
knowledge that most humans are not very bright, either, if even this specially selected mortal can \softline
ask such a stupid question.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Marco's speech, the only object of possible attention in the darkness, twenty-one \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 terzine}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of moral philosophy, may be paraphrased as follows: If the heavens moved all things, there \softline
would be no free will; even if they did, you would still have the power to resist and conquer (67-78); to a greater power and better nature than the celestial heavens you, free, are subject, and that \softline
creates the mind [the rational soul] in you, which has nothing to do with those revolving spheres \softline
(79-83); let me expand: God lovingly created the (rational) soul in each of you; at its birth, since it \softline
was made by Him, even if it is a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tabula rasa}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , it loves; and it loves anything at all if it is not guided \softline
or restrained; therefore, a leader and laws are necessary (84-96); laws exist, but who administers \softline
them? no one, because the pope is involved in temporal affairs and thus gives the wrong example \softline
that is much imitated (97-102); thus you can see that bad guidance and not corrupt human nature \softline
accounts for the wickedness of the world; Rome, which once made the world good, used then to \softline
have two suns which lit each path, secular and sacred (103-108); now, since the regal and pastoral \softline
functions have been conjoined, ill ensues -- by their fruits shall you know them (109-114); in \softline
northern Italy, which once was the home of courtesy and valor before the Church opposed \softline
Frederick II, there are now but three good men, all of them old (115-126); thus you must make it \softline
known that the Church of Rome is befouled and befouling, arrogating unto itself both \softline
governments (127-129).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Marco's immediate and angry response (but his anger is meant to be taken as \softline
virtuous, as the righteous indignation of the just) lays the issue bare.  'The fault is in the stars' was \softline
an earlier day's way of claiming 'the dog [or computer] ate my homework' or 'the devil made me 
do it.'  The celestial spheres, forming our tendencies, do incline us to various sensuous and sensual \softline
activities, but we are not forced to follow our appetites, since we have our will to direct our \softline
appetites.  The concept of free will does not receive its full exposition until Beatrice's discourse \softline
upon it in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.19-84, a moment marked by heavy seriousness because this concept lies at \softline
the very core of any Christian moral assertion.  In Platonic (and Aristotelian) terms, our sensitive \softline
soul, which responds to such stimuli, is (or should be) governed by our rational soul.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The great Christian paradox of our free submission to God's will stands before the \softline
reader here.  Singleton (comm. to verse 80) suggests the relevance of Jesus' reference to himself \softline
as a yoke to be borne by his followers (Matthew 11:29) and Dante's own paradoxical formulation, \softline
'iugum libertatis' (the yoke of liberty) in his epistle (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.5) to the Florentines who were in \softline
opposition to the emperor (Henry VII) in the autumn of 1310.  God, the greater force and better \softline
nature, creates the third (rational) soul in us which is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  bound by celestial influences.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Concluding the grand design of his argument, Marco triumphantly puts forward \softline
his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ergo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : any fault that we find when we examine human activity lies in us, not in our stars.  And \softline
now he will expatiate on this paradigmatic equation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The image of the female child (its gender matching that of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 anima}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [soul]) \softline
heedless in her playfulness picks up the train of such images of youthful ebullience from the last \softline
canto, where the sun was disporting himself like a little boy (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.1-6).  The \softline
rational soul, as yet unknowing, turns to anything that delights it without measuring the worth of \softline
that delight.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This 'ladder' of physically attractive objects, beginning with trifling goods, was \softline
earlier described by Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.xii.14-18, as was apparently first noted by Scartazzini \softline
(comm. to verse 90), when we begin, as children, longing for an apple, a little bird, pretty \softline
garments, then a horse, a mistress, riches, then greater riches, and finally enormous wealth.  So \softline
does the corrupt human soul move from childhood to its 'maturity' -- unless such appetites are \softline
controlled.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'ruler' that Marco (not to mention Dante) seems to have in mind would not \softline
appear to be anything but secular.  Some commentators recognize how radical an idea this is, \softline
while several of them (e.g., Benvenuto, Lombardi) simply assume that Dante must here be \softline
speaking of a religious leader.  But the language is clear: the poet is speaking of an emperor who, \softline
guiding our race as its leader (the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 guida}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [guide] of verse 93) and upholding the laws (the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fren}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[rein] of that verse), will allow us to see at least the tower of the 'true city.'  The question of \softline
whether this is meant to be understood as the City of God on earth or in Heaven, or indeed of an \softline
ideal secular city, draws some dispute.  Whatever the solution of that part of the riddle, the \softline
forceful and (at least potentially) disturbing fact is that Dante, in search of moral leadership for \softline
mankind (rather than for individual humans), here looks to the state rather than to the Church.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This tercet explains the vigorous and unusual Ghibelline turn in the preceding \softline
verses.  The laws, left us by Justinian, exist but are not enforced.  And this blame is laid upon the \softline
Church for keeping the emperor from power, since the pope may indeed ruminate, but does not 
distinguish between ecclesiastical and secular power.  Tozer (comm. to verse 99) explains the \softline
reference as follows: 'The terms here used refer to the tests by which beasts were determined to \softline
be clean under the Mosaic law, i.e., that they should chew the cud and divide the hoof (Lev. \softline
11:3).  As applied to the Heads of the Church, the allegorical meaning of "chewing the cud" \softline
seems to be the acquisition of wisdom by pondering on sources of knowledge; but in respect of \softline
"dividing the hoof" the symbolism is twofold....  First, it signifies the practice of good morals,... \softline
and it is applied in this sense in vv. 100-105, where it is explained that it was the unprincipled \softline
conduct of the Roman Court which had demoralized the world.  Secondly, the dividing of the \softline
hoof represents the separation of the temporal and spiritual powers, which principle the popes had \softline
ignored.  This interpretation is found in vv. 127-129, where the Church of Rome is spoken of as a \softline
beast of burden, which falls in the mud in consequence of its not distinguishing between these two \softline
spheres of government, the reference obviously being to the support given to such animals in \softline
slippery ground by the divided hoof.  The two allegorical applications are not wholly unconnected \softline
with one another, because it was greed of worldly gains which led to the appropriation of the \softline
temporal power by the Papacy.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reason that Dante here hopes only for temporal moral leadership is now \softline
completely clear: the current papacy leads mankind only in the example of unbridled appetite.  \softline
Thus the Church, which is not to interfere with the City of Man on Earth (Augustine's negative \softline
phrase turned to a Dantean positive), cannot show the way to the City of God, either, and that \softline
task is turned over, in Dante's asseverations here, to the emperor.  It is perhaps impossible to \softline
believe that he would have written such lines without having Henry VII in mind as the one who \softline
must accomplish these tasks of leadership.  If Dante is writing between 1310 and 1313, it is more \softline
than likely that he did.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The culminating image in Marco's discourse returns to the 'good old days' when \softline
the early Church and the empire each performed their functions separately.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante is here, within the confines of a single tercet, entering polemically into one of the \softline
great political/theological debates of his time, the relative authority of emperor and pope.  Against \softline
the hierocrats, who warmly supported papal claims to supremacy, Dante argues, on the basis of a \softline
revision in the hierocrats' central and polemical metaphor (pope as 'sun,' emperor as subordinate \softline
'moon'), that the two authorities are both supreme and have their authority independent of one \softline
another, both being established by the direct will of God.  Singleton (comm. to verse 106) \softline
remembers, in this context, Dante's earlier and later precisions (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.v.3-8; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Mon}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.xvi.1-2) \softline
that when Christ was born under the rule of Augustus the world experienced a moment of \softline
perfection, what St. Paul calls }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 plenitudinem temporis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the fullness of time -- Galatians 4:4).  \softline
Dante will later develop the metaphor of the 'two suns' in a key chapter of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (III.iv).  \softline
(For the date of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see the brief summary of the debate in Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: A Life in \softline
Works}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001)], pp. 150-51.  Most currently interested in the \softline
problem believe that the work was composed ca. 1317, i.e., after the death of Henry VII, and \softline
after Dante had composed the early cantos of his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , since in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.xii.6 he says \softline
'sicut in Paradiso Comoedie iam dixi' [as I have said in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of my }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ], referring to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.19-24).  Scott [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Political Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania \softline
Press, 1996)], p. 155, thinks both these passages were written after Pope Clement's 'betrayal' of \softline
Henry VII, 1312-1313.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab On the entire subject of the authority of the emperor see the still essential work of Ernst \softline
Kantorowicz (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The King's Two Bodies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1957]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a passage in St. Gregory Nazianzus's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vita sua}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that may have caught Dante's \softline
attention see Giovanni Farris's article ("I 'due soli' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Pg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI 107] ed una fonte patristica," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Critica \softline
letteraria}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 [1976], pp. 211-16): 'Non autem Natura dedit duo lumina solis / Sed Romas dedit illa \softline
duas, quae totius orbis / Lampades existunt, Romam veteremque novamque: / Hoc inter sese \softline
tantum discrimen habentes, / Quod videt hanc Phoebus splendere, sed Hesperus illam.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante laments the fact that now the Church's pastoral crook has taken into itself \softline
the imperial sword; his image, though of inanimate things, makes the resultant object seem a \softline
horrific animate hybrid, as does the reference to Matthew 7:16 or 7:20: 'by their fruits you shall \softline
know them' (words spoken by Jesus to impugn false teachers).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's geographical reference is to the northeastern sector of Italy, not the \softline
territories associated with the presence of the emperor Frederick, but Marco's home ground.  For \softline
Dante, Frederick was the last emperor to take his role as emperor of all Europe seriously (see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.iii.6, as Pietrobono [comm. to verse 117] suggests, where he is described as 'the last \softline
emperor of the Romans').  It may seem strange that Dante should here support the kingship of \softline
Frederick II, seen among the heretics in hell (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.119).  The issue, however, is not Frederick's \softline
personal worth, but his rights and privileges as emperor.  These were grounds for contention \softline
between Frederick and the Church throughout his reign (1212-1250).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Marco's three }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vecchi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , all still alive in 1300, offer a Lombard counterpart to \softline
Cacciaguida's forty Florentine families from the 'good old days' in that city that are listed in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI: Currado da Palazzo, from Brescia; Gherardo da Camino, from Padua; and Guido \softline
da Castello, from Reggio Emilia.  All three of them had Guelph affiliations.  Dante praises the last \softline
two in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  when he is discussing true nobility (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.xiv.12; IV.xvi.6).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Marco's antipapal charge to Dante will be echoed and amplified in that given \softline
him by Beatrice in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.103-105.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 131-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante shows his agreement with Marco's analysis of the church/state problem in \softline
contemporary Christendom in ancient Hebrew terms: the family of Levi, because they were, like \softline
the sons of Aaron, in a priestly function for Israel, were denied any right to inherit land because of \softline
their priestly privileges.  See Numbers 18:20-32.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-140.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist's ignorance of Gherardo's virtues offers Marco (and the poet) a \softline
chance to replay the theme of the moment, that things are not what they used to be.  The early \softline
commentators are uncertain whether or not the mention of Gaia is meant to be to her praise or \softline
blame.  Jacopo della Lana (comm. to verse 140) and Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 139-140) say she \softline
was well known as a loose woman.  However, Benvenuto's self-proclaimed student, John of \softline
Serravalle, who generally supports his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 maestro}{\plain \fs24 \f1 's opinions, has only good to speak of her (and \softline
even claims that she wrote vernacular poetry -- [comm. to vv.139-141]).  Most modern \softline
commentators argue that, since the argument at hand is that the old times bore at least some \softline
notable virtue while the present day is leaden in that respect, it would only make sense for Gaia's 
name to represent a descent from virtue.  The meaning of the clause 's'io nol togliessi da sua figlia \softline
Gaia' (unless / I were to take one [a nickname] from his daughter, Gaia) is, however, problematic.  \softline
According to Torraca (comm. to vv. 139-149) his sobriquet would then be 'il gaio' (the merry) in \softline
recognition of his courtly actions and style of being; there is probably no better positive reading of \softline
the verse than this one.  If we wish to insist on the logically more promising negative force of this \softline
line, the same descriptive phrase (now only meaning 'the father of Gaia') would have the effect of \softline
showing how the virtues of the father were not found in the daughter.  While the logic of this \softline
entire sequence calls for such a reading, the feeling in the line would seem to support Torraca's \softline
currently unfavored reading.  As several commentators suggest, until such time as some clearer \softline
evidence for Dante's opinion of Gaia is unearthed, it is impossible to be sure of the tone of the \softline
reference, wholehearted or ironic.  The only two other uses of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gaio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the poem are, \softline
however, totally positive: see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.60 and XXVI.102.  Nonetheless, in verse 121 Dante \softline
has Marco refer to only three old men still alive in Lombardy who are good.  Since Gaia did not \softline
die until 1311, would she not have to be considered a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fourth}{\plain \fs24 \f1  good Lombard (and thus not to be \softline
included)?  Or, as a woman, is she not allowed inclusion in the paltry list of the virtuous?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 141-145.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having walked through the smoke, they have now reached its 'edge,' and so \softline
may soon regain the light of the sun.  Thus we learn that Marco and his colleagues in repenting \softline
Wrath all must measure their pace so as not to walk either too slowly or too quickly in the smoke, \softline
which is moving clockwise along the terrace.  The smoke does not come upon them, as it did \softline
Dante and Virgil; they inhabit it.  Marco now retreats from the light, having walked too quickly in \softline
order to keep pace with his new companions.\par
}}