{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 17}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This marks the first time that an address to the reader begins a canto, here just at the \softline
midpoint of the poem.  (Two later cantos will, however, begin with such apostrophe: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II \softline
and XIII.)  These opening lines are similetic in nature if not precisely so in form.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante is apparently countering certain contemporary views, which held that moles were \softline
completely sightless (see Brunetto Latini, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tresor}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.197, cited by Scartazzini [comm. to verse 3]).  \softline
Tozer (comm. to verse 3) cites Virgil, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.183: 'oculis capti... talpae' (sightless moles).  \softline
Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 1-6), who says that he thought of this passage once, when he was \softline
caught in mountain mists between Florence and Bologna, understood that Dante meant that moles \softline
could see, if only weakly (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 debiliter}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), through the skin that covers their eyes.  Supporting this \softline
view, Lombardi (comm. to vv. 1-6) suggests that Dante is in accord with Aristotle, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Historia \softline
animalium }{\plain \fs24 \f1 I.9.  (For the question of Dante's knowledge of Aristotle's work on natural history as it \softline
was shaped by the translations of Michael Scot and the commentaries of Avicenna and Albertus \softline
Magnus, see Cesare Vasoli's note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.viii.10 [Milan: Ricciardi, 1988], p. 184.)  For a \softline
modern view of what kind of sight in what kind of mole is at stake here, see Trucchi (comm. to \softline
this passage).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This entire section of the canto is dominated by words that often in Dante refer to a higher \softline
form of sight, in contrast with the darkness in which the scene begins.  In the first forty-three \softline
verses we encounter ten occurrences of words for seeing as follows: forms of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imagine}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imagine}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imaginativa}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imaginar}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) at vv. 7, 13, 21, 31, 43; of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vedere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vedessi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 veder}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vista}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vis{\f3 \'56}one}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) at vv. 2, \softline
8, 27, 34; the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fantasia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  at verse 25.  These three forms occur thirty-eight times in the poem; \softline
thus more than one-fourth of all occurrences of this group of words occupies less than 1/300 of \softline
the poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet returns briefly to the narrative mode in order to set the scene for what is \softline
about to follow: it is just after sunset at the shore of the mountain, with the sun's rays still striking \softline
the higher reaches of its slopes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This passage gave birth, in the early commentators, to the repetition of a charming \softline
story.  Dante, having found a book he had never seen before in Siena, read it just where he found \softline
it, in a street stall, so that he might fix it in his mind, and did so for more than three hours one \softline
afternoon.  When someone later asked him whether he had been disturbed by the wedding \softline
festivities that had occurred during his reading, he expressed no awareness that any such things \softline
had occurred.  This 'incident' derives from Boccaccio's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Trattatello}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and is also reported by \softline
Benvenuto (comm. to this passage).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab On these equivalent powers of the soul, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 phantasia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imaginatio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see St. Thomas (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ST}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
I.lxxviii.4): 'the phantasy or imagination is like a treasure house of images received by the senses' \softline
(cited by Sally Mussetter, "Fantasy," in Richard Lansing, ed., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Encyclopedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [New York: \softline
Garland, 2000]).  Thus both 'imagination' and 'phantasy' have a far different meaning in the works \softline
of Dante than in anything written after the Romantic era, where the imagination, given its \softline
'esemplastic power' in the unforgettable phrase of Coleridge, rather than merely receiving them, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 produces}{\plain \fs24 \f1  images.  For discussions of the imaginative faculty see Murry Wright Bundy (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The \softline
Theory of Imagination in Classical and Medieval Thought}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Urbana: University of Illinois, 1927]); \softline
Harry Austryn Wolfson ("The Internal Sense in Latin, Arabic, and Hebrew Philosophic Texts," 
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Harvard Theological Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  28 [1935], pp. 69-133); and Ignazio Baldelli ("Visione, \softline
immaginazione e fantasia nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 I sogni nel Medioevo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Tullio Gregory [Rome: \softline
Edizioni dell'Atene, 1985], pp. 1-10).  See also Paul Arvisu Dumol, "Imagination," in Richard \softline
Lansing, ed., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Encyclopedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (New York: Garland, 2000).  On the supernatural character of \softline
the informing light for the visions that follow, with consideration of the key terms }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imagine, \softline
imaginativa}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fantasia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see Kenelm Foster ("The Human Spirit in Action: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  \softline
Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  88 [1970]), pp. 21-23; and Teodolinda Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine "Comedy": \softline
Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992]), pp. 152-55.  And see \softline
Patrick Boyde (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Perception and passion in Dante's "Comedy"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Cambridge University \softline
Press, 1993]), pp. 44-50, on 'apprehension' and its reliance on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imaginatio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 /}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 phantasia.}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As the Anonimo Fiorentino (comm. to vv. 13-15) explains, what is experienced by the five \softline
senses is registered in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 senso comune}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and then conserved, without its physical elements, in the \softline
imagination, which, in contrast to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 senso comune}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the recipient of sense impressions only so \softline
long as they are present, is able to preserve these impressions.  To paraphrase Dante's ruminative \softline
question, he turns to the imaginative faculty within himself to ask, 'How do you so remove our \softline
attention from outer reality that we do not even notice the most intrusive events?  And what \softline
informs you if not a sense impression?  A light that takes form in Heaven either naturally (i.e., \softline
through the natural influence of the stars) or through the will of God.'  It seems clear that the \softline
visions that follow, like those experienced by the protagonist two cantos earlier (see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.85-86), are sent to him (and to the penitents on this terrace -- but not to Virgil [see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.130-132]) directly by God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Is the division of the sin of violence in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  remembered here, with each of the \softline
three exemplary figures guilty of one of the sins of violence portrayed in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : against others \softline
(Procne), against oneself (Amata), and against God (Haman)?  For this possibility see notes to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.109-114 and XII.16-21 (last paragraph), as well as Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), pp. 310-11.  Wrath is defined, later \softline
on in this canto (vv. 121-123), as involving the hardened will in a desire for revenge (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vendetta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  It \softline
is clear that the sort of anger repented on this terrace is not the same sin that we encountered in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII-VIII, where we saw those who had been overcome by intemperate anger.  Here we \softline
observe the results of wrathful behavior formed with deliberation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It seems clear both that Dante has once again been favored by God-sent ecstatic visions \softline
and that Virgil now knows better than to attempt to inject himself into the proceedings: he is \softline
utterly silent throughout the scene, although we may imagine that Dante is once again manifesting \softline
'drunken' behavior to anyone who observes him (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.121-123).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For Dante's earlier advertence to Ovid's story of Philomel and Procne see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.13-15 and note.  There Philomel is dealt with as a sympathetic figure; here Procne, \softline
her sister, is made exemplary of the sin of Wrath for murdering her own son, Itys, in order to take \softline
vengeance upon Tereus for raping her sister.  It may seem odd to today's readers, but Dante \softline
thinks of Procne as the nightingale, Philomel as the swallow.  (See discussion in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IX.13-15.)  This ecstatic vision (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.85-86) is sent into Dante's mind, we must assume, \softline
by God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again the poet insists on the extraordinary and extrasensory nature of his 
visionary experience.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   There can be little doubt: the notion of these visions as having 'rained down' into the \softline
image-receiving faculty of his soul cements the claim made for them.  Here is part of Singleton's \softline
comment on this verse: 'The phantasy, or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imaginativa}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , is "lofty" because of the experience of a \softline
vision coming from such a source.  For this adjectival usage, cf. "la morta poes{\f3 \'58}," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.7; "la \softline
scritta morta," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.127; "alto ingegno," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.7; and again "alta fantasia" in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXXIII.142.'  It should perhaps be noted that Singleton here probably only rightly contradicts his \softline
own previous gloss of 'alto ingegno' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.7, which he then interpreted as meaning 'the \softline
poet's own genius.'  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.7-9.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab That the poet here uses the very phrase 'alta fantasia,' which will mark his final vision of \softline
the Trinity three lines from the end of the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.142), underlines the importance of \softline
this 'trial run' for his capacity as visionary protagonist (and eventually God-inspired poet).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 26-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again one must know the story in order to understand the meaning of the \softline
vision, which is presented elliptically, a technique Dante employs in all three examples in these \softline
lines (19-39).  In none of these is the exemplary figure named.  This passage is perhaps the most \softline
striking in this respect, since the three 'supporting players' are all named, while we must supply the \softline
name of Haman.  Like Procne, Haman is enraged against another (Mordecai, for not bowing \softline
down to him, when he had been promoted to being Ahasuerus's prime minister: see Esther 3:5, \softline
where Haman is described as being 'full of wrath' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 iratus est valde}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]); like Procne, he tries to take \softline
revenge by killing others, deciding to put to death all the Jews in the kingdom of Ahasuerus.  At \softline
Esther's urging Ahasuerus rescinds the decree Haman had wrung from him, thus saving God's \softline
people, the Jews in their Persian exile, and has Haman put to death on the gallows (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 crux}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the \softline
Vulgate at Esther 5:14, thus accounting for Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 crucifisso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  at verse 26).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'bubble' in Dante's vision breaks as a bubble does when it rises above the \softline
water that contained it, only to give place to another, the final vision of this terrace.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Lavinia, anonymous at first but soon to name herself (verse 37), addresses her \softline
unnamed mother, Amata, the consort of Latinus, king of Latium, and reproaches her for her \softline
suicide.  As Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 31-39) point out, Dante, in the spring of 1311, deals \softline
with this scene (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.595-603) in his second epistle to Henry VII and refers correctly to the \softline
context of Amata's suicide (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epist}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.24), i.e., she kills herself because she believes that her \softline
opposition to her daughter's marriage to Aeneas has resulted in a failed war and the death of \softline
Turnus (whom she wrongly assumes to have been killed when she sees the soldiers of Aeneas \softline
approaching the city without opposition).  Following expressions of puzzlement with Dante's \softline
treatment of this Virgilian text by Porena (comm. to these lines), Bosco and Reggio too are \softline
puzzled that Dante here develops the situation differently, and suggest that perhaps Dante wants \softline
here to make Amata a more sympathetic character.  But perhaps he had simpler plans.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.286-405 Virgil presents the results of Juno's anger at Latinus's promise of \softline
Lavinia in marriage to Aeneas (and not to Turnus, the suitor preferred by Amata, described in \softline
verse 345 as a woman on fire, stirred by angers [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 irae}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  Juno's wrath in turn stirs the Fury Alecto, \softline
who comes to earth and puts a venomous snake in Amata's breast.  Poisoned by its venom, Amata \softline
goes mad with angry grief and, in the guise of a Bacchante, takes Lavinia to the countryside in the 
attempt to stop the marriage.  All of this insubordination will, of course, eventually fail.  It is not \softline
clear that Dante is reading the text of Virgil's twelfth book any differently now than he was when \softline
he wrote his second letter to Henry (whether that was written before or after this passage).  At \softline
whom must Amata be angry, from the point of view of Lavinia?  Aeneas, because he will now \softline
have Lavinia in marriage.  In the epistle, Florence, rejecting her rightful ruler, Henry, is compared \softline
to suicidal Amata.  There is no reason for such not to be Dante's understanding here.  It is perhaps \softline
coincidental that the description of Amata's suicide is preceded in Virgil by a simile comparing the \softline
losing Latians to bees whose hive has been penetrated by the farmer's emetic smoke; nonetheless, \softline
our scene is also preceded by the smoke of anger.  Amata, in this respect similar to the two \softline
previous exemplary figures, kills someone else in order to harm the person whom she truly hates, \softline
Aeneas.  That someone else is herself.  Hers is the secret of the terrorist, dying to let her enemy \softline
know the depths of her envious hatred.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The 'death of yet another' with which the passage ends refers to Turnus in such a way as \softline
to indicate that Lavinia understood that her mother had incorrectly assumed that Turnus was \softline
already dead, just as she does in Virgil's poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The simile is not difficult or surprising.  Just as a dreaming sleeper, awakened by a \softline
sunbeam, loses his hold on his dream in bits and pieces before it utterly disappears, so was Dante \softline
jarred from his visionary sleep by the sudden brightness of the Angel of Mercy.  There may be a \softline
reference here to verses in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.268-269), as was first suggested by Venturi (comm. to \softline
verse 42): 'It was the hour when for weary mortals their first rest begins and, by gift of the gods, \softline
deliciously twines round them' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tempus erat, quo prima quies mortalibus aegris / incipit et dono \softline
divum gratissima serpit}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Virgil's description of the beginning of sleep is, according to Venturi, \softline
reflected in Dante's description of its ending, both passages featuring forms of verbs for serpentine \softline
movements (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 serpit}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 guizza}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  On the other hand, most commentators suggest that Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 guizzare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(shudder, quiver, wriggle) is more likely to be used to indicate the dying movement made by a fish \softline
out of water.  While Venturi's proposal is still seconded by a commentator or two, most currently \softline
do not refer to it.  This angelic light outshines even that of the sun, explains Benvenuto (comm. to \softline
these verses) 'because an angel gives off light more splendid than any light found in the world.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This simile should be remembered in the reading of the final simile of awakening in the \softline
poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.58-63).  Dante's fascination with the state between dream and waking is a \softline
notable part of his program of investigating the mental state of humans (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXX.136-141).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As Singleton notes, in this verse we have again an insistence on paying attention to a \softline
single thing (here the angel's permissive command), to the exclusion of all others.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Perhaps a paraphrase of Virgil's remarks will be helpful: 'This divine spirit does \softline
what we wish without our asking, hiding itself in its own radiance (and thus allowing us to see); \softline
and it deals with us as we deal with ourselves, for he who sees a need, and yet waits to be asked, \softline
unkindly predisposes himself toward denying the request.'  As Daniello (comm. to vv. 52-60) \softline
noted, this is a restatement of a Senecan motto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De beneficiis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.i.3), concerning the grace of \softline
giving before one is asked, one that Dante had already made his own in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.viii.16.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 62-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the 'rule' (apparently more consented to than insisted on) that governs 
nocturnal stasis on the mountain see Sordello's explanation (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.53-60).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 68-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Angel of Mercy draws upon the Beatitude found in Matthew 5:9, 'Blessed are \softline
the peacemakers,' yet does so in such a way as to indicate tacitly the distinction between 'good' \softline
anger (righteous indignation) and the 'bad' form of wrath (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ira mala}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) that is fueled by desire for \softline
personal revenge.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sun having set, its rays touch only the higher reaches of the mountain.  It is \softline
after 6pm and the first stars are visible.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist's inner apostrophe of his flagging power of locomotion shows his \softline
awareness of the special kind of nocturnal debility afflicting souls on this mountain.  As we will \softline
see, his physical condition matches that of a man who is slothful.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-80.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Since, on the terrace of Wrath, Dante's learning experiences occurred in darkness, \softline
and since it is dark as he enters the fourth terrace, he assumes that he may be instructed in virtue \softline
by what he will hear.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Just as the poem is now entering its second half and this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  arriving at its \softline
midpoint, so the experience of the repentance of the seven capital vices has come to its central \softline
moment with Sloth.  From Dante's question and Virgil's answer we also understand that there is a \softline
gulf separating the vices below, all of which begin in the love of what is wrongful, from the rest, \softline
all of which result from insufficient or improper desire to attain the good.  The sin purged here is \softline
called }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 acedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in Latin and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 accidia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in Italian.  (For a lengthy consideration see Siegfried Wenzel's \softline
book [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Sin of Sloth: "Acedia" in Medieval Thought and Literature}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Chapel Hill: University of \softline
North Carolina Press, 1967)]; see also Andrea Ciotti's entry, which sometimes takes issue with \softline
Wenzel, "accidia e accidiosi" (ED.1970.1); for a wider view of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 acedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Reinhard Kuhn [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The \softline
Demon of Noontide: Ennui in Western Literature}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ], \softline
with special reference to Dante on pp. 56-59).  In the poem, the word will appear in the next \softline
canto, used retrospectively to indicate the sin repented here (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.132); however, in \softline
adjectival form it was present earlier (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.123 -- see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.118-126).  \softline
Scartazzini (comm. to vv. 85-86) brings St. Thomas (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ST}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.lxiii.2) into play as the one who affords \softline
a clear understanding of this sin, a kind of spiritual torpor accompanied by (or even causing) \softline
physical weariness: 'Acedia vero est quaedam tristitia qua homo redditur tardus ad spirituales \softline
actus propter corporalem laborem.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This second extended 'diagram' is excused, as was the first (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI), by the \softline
need to linger awhile before continuing the journey.  Compare verse 84 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.10-15.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-139.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The rest of the canto is given over, without interruption, to Virgil's discourse on \softline
the nature of love.  It misses only by a little being the longest speech we have heard spoken in the \softline
poem since Ugolino's in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.4-75, beaten out by Sordello's recounting of the current \softline
denizens of the Valley of the Princes (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.87-136) and of course by Marco the Lombard's \softline
discourse on the related failures of Church and empire (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.65-129).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-92.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The given of Virgil's whole speech is the universality of love.  It proceeds from \softline
God in all His creation, and from all things that He has created.  In the rational beings (angels and \softline
humans), it returns to Him; in the lower animals, to one another and to their habitat; in insentient \softline
bodies, to their habitat (e.g., water lilies on ponds) or place of origin (e.g., fire always wanting to \softline
reach the sky beneath the moon).  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.iii.2-5, cited by Singleton (comm. to these \softline
lines). \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 93-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Love is of two kinds, natural or 'mental.'  Natural love always desires the utmost \softline
good, and for rational beings that is God.  Thus all humans }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 naturally}{\plain \fs24 \f1  desire the good.  If that \softline
were the only love that motivated us, there would be no sin in the world.  However, there }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 is}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
another kind of love, one reached by a mental effort, and thus found only in angels and humans.  \softline
(Since angels have all made their will known, to love God eternally, only humans will be the \softline
subjects of Virgil's discourse.)  Human beings, using their free wills, may fall into three kinds of \softline
sin; choosing the wrong object for their loves (sins repented on the first three terraces); loving the \softline
good deficiently (as do the slothful, whom we are about to encounter); loving the good \softline
excessively (the sins repented on the three highest terraces, Avarice, Gluttony, Lust).  For \softline
discussion of the way in which Dante, unlike Andreas Capellanus and Guido Cavalcanti, is only \softline
interested in affirming spiritual love, see Pasquazi ({\u8220\'93}Il Canto XVII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove \softline
letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le Monnier, 1970]), pp. 227-31.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The lines essentially repeat what has been established in vv. 91-96, as though \softline
Dante sensed the difficulty most readers would be likely to have with this conceptual poetry.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The argument pauses for its first affirmation: whether we sin or use our (free) \softline
wills well, the results observed come from our ways of loving -- and our merit or demerit accords \softline
with the nature of our loves.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first consequence of this doctrine is to remove two possible motivations \softline
from consideration: hatred of self or hatred of God, both of which are declared to be impossible.  \softline
Singleton (comm. to vv. 109-111) points out that sinners like Capaneus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV) and Vanni \softline
Fucci (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV) indeed do demonstrate a hatred for God, a feeling possible only in hell, but not \softline
in this life on earth.  The sins of suicide and blasphemy, however, surely seem to contradict this \softline
theoretical notion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-124.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Hatred of self or of God having been discarded as motivations for immoral \softline
human conduct, hatred of our neighbor remains, expressed in (1) prideful desire that his success \softline
be reversed so that we may be his superior, (2) in envious desire that his success be thwarted, (3) \softline
in wrathful desire to take revenge for the harm he has inflicted on us.  We realize -- although we \softline
are told it in case we might not -- that these are the sins of Pride, Envy, and Wrath that we have \softline
just finished visiting.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-119.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The actual midpoint of the poem lies between these two verses, numbers 7116 \softline
and 7117 of the poem's 14,233.  See discussion in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.133-139.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 125-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These two verses refer to all of the other four sins as a group united in at least 
seeking the good (as was not the case for the first three), but imperfectly.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil now defines Sloth, the first of these two better kinds of sin, as 'laggard \softline
love.'  Thus, by failing to respond to God's offered love more energetically, the slothful are more \softline
rebellious to Him than are the avaricious, gluttonous, and lustful, who are pursuing a secondary \softline
good rather than avoiding the primary one.  In Dante's day, Sloth was a sin particularly identified \softline
with the clergy, with reference not so much to their physical laziness as to their spiritually laggard \softline
lives.  See Reinhard Kuhn (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Demon of Noontide: Ennui in Western Literature}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: \softline
Princeton University Press, 1976]), pp. 39-64.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-139.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This secondary good has been referred to earlier at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII.98 and will \softline
occupy Cantos XX through XXVII, broken into three categories: money, food, and sex.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 'The Poet's Number at the Center': Singleton ("The Poet's Number at the Center," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern \softline
Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  80 [1965], pp. 1-10), noted a chiastic pattern at the heart of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
indeed at its very numerical center (or near it: since there are fifty cantos that precede }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII \softline
and it is the first of the final fifty; the white space between the sixteenth and seventeenth cantos is \softline
the center -- at least if we count by cantos).  The line lengths of Cantos XIV-XX produce the \softline
following apparently deliberate chiasmus: \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}\pard \fs24\fi-6480\li6480\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab 151 \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 151\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-5040\li5040\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab 145   145\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 145   145 \par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab          139\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Singleton's conclusion, based on the view that seven is the 'poet's number,' is that Dante has \softline
deliberately set a seven-based chiastic pattern at the very center of his poem, and goes on to enjoy \softline
the coincidence that his discovery only occurred in 1965, the year marking the seven-hundredth \softline
anniversary of Dante's birth.  Attacking this finding, Richard J. Pegis ("Numerology and \softline
Probability in Dante," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Mediaeval Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  29 [1967], pp. 370-73) suggests that the pattern is the \softline
result of coincidence and produces a second and entirely similar figure found at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III-IX:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab           151\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab 148\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 148\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab 139\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 139\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab 136\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 136\ul0 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 It is Pegis's view that this earlier example of chiasmus (later also observed by Eugenio Ragni \softline
[Canto VI," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Neapolitana: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Pompeo Giannantonio (Naples: \softline
Loffredo, 1989)], p. 116) only makes the likelihood that the one observed by Singleton was \softline
aleatory more certain.  To Singleton's defense came Logan ("The Poet's Central Numbers," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  86 [1971], pp. 95-98), who not only believes that both patterns are \softline
deliberate, but goes on to develop the thesis that there are two parallel cases of still more \softline
developed chiasmus at the center of each of the final two }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , now calculating the 'number' \softline
of each canto as derived from the sum of the lines that make up each canto's length, as follows:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}\pard \fs24\fi-5040\li5040\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 \ul0 \tab Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \ul\f1 canto\ul0 \tab \ul \ul0 \tab \ul lines\ul0 \tab \ul \ul0 \tab \ul sum\ul0 \tab \ul \ul0 \tab \ul lines\ul0 \tab \ul \ul0 \tab \ul sum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XI\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 142\ul0 \tab  \ul0 \tab  7\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 139\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 13\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XII\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 136\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 145\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XIII\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 154\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 142\ul0 \tab  \ul0 \tab  7\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XIV\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 151\ul0 \tab  \ul0 \tab  7\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 139\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 13\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XV\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 145\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 148\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 13\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XVI\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 145\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 154\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XVII\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 139\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 13\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 142\ul0 \tab   \ul0 \tab  7\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-2160\li2160\tx720\tx1440\tx2160 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XVIII\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 145\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 136\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XIX\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 145\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 148\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 13\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XX\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 151\ul0 \tab   \ul0 \tab  7\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 148\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 13\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XXI\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 136\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 142\ul0 \tab   \ul0 \tab  7\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XXII\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 154\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 154\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 10\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-2160\li2160\tx720\tx1440\tx2160 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab XXIII\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 133\ul0 \tab   \ul0 \tab  7\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 139\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab 13\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 If one tries to establish a control for these findings, one may note that Dante's canto lengths run \softline
between 115 and 160 lines.  No cantos contain 118, 121, or 127 verses, as is clear from the \softline
helpful charts found in Ferrante ("A Poetics of Chaos and Harmony," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Cambridge \softline
Companion to Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. R. Jacoff [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993]), pp. 154-55.  \softline
The thirteen line lengths that Dante does employ (115, 124, 130, 133, 136, 139, 142, 145, 148, \softline
151, 154, 157, 160) all add up to 7, 10, or 13 except for 130, which equals 4 (1 + 3 + 0).  But \softline
only once after }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX does he produce a canto of 130 lines (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III).  Thus Logan's claims \softline
for an intentional design are possibly compromised by the fact that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 all}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the canto lengths in these \softline
sections of the two final }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  necessarily convert to the sums 7, 10, or 13.  This lessens the \softline
likelihood that these third and fourth examples of chiasmus are deliberate.  It is of course possible \softline
that Logan is simply right; it is difficult to be certain about such things.  Now see the study by \softline
Federico Turelli ("Il ruolo della casualit{\f3 \'42} nelle ripetizioni di rima della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura \softline
italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [2002], pp. 507-23), reviewing the problem and arguing that both of the seven-fold symmetrical sequences found in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (III-IX, XIV-XX) are the result of deliberate \softline
plan and do have structural significance.  And see Colette de Callata{\f3 \'6c}-van der Mersch (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Le \softline
D{\f2\u233\'e9}chiffrement de Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 3 vols. [Peeters: Louvain, 1994-97]), vol. I, pp. 24-26, also seeking to \softline
unriddle the design in the lengths of Dante's cantos.  Her argument is immediately compromised \softline
when she claims that the thirteen canto lengths represent a choice from among forty-five \softline
possibilities (cantos of from 115 to 160 verses [and thus actually 46]), when in fact, because of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 terza rima}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Dante had only sixteen available choices within that range.  That sort of carelessness is \softline
close to fatal to a numerological argument that requires every element in it to be convincing.  See \softline
also her accountancy (p. 79), invoking a system built on sevens, that somehow represents the \softline
cantos devoted to the earthly paradise as being seven, while they are indeed six (XXVIII to \softline
XXXIII).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For still another derivation of a pattern from Singleton's finding see Riccardo Ambrosini \softline
("Sul messianismo di Dante: A proposito del canto XVII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  18 [2001]), p. \softline
86, suggesting that it is significant that each successive 'central' canto, numbered XVII, contains \softline
three more verses than its precursor, 136, 139, and 142.  Ambrosini points out that no other set of \softline
three cantos reveals such a progression.  Nonetheless, one feels compelled to ask whether or not 
this 'pattern' might simply be the result of chance.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a brief consideration of the increasing length, as the poem proceeds, of Dante's cantos \softline
see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.28-32.\par
}}