{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 06}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Margherita Frankel ("La similitudine della zara [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 . VI, 1-12] ed il rapporto fra \softline
Dante e Virgilio nell'Antepurgatorio," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Studi Americani su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 , ed. G. C. Alessio and R. \softline
Hollander [Milan: F. Angeli, 1989]), pp. 113-16, discussing this opening simile, citing Hollander \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990]), p. 31, from \softline
an as yet unpublished earlier version (completed in 1983), deploys the argument that the figure of \softline
the loser within the simile equates with that of Virgil outside it.  That so reasonable an \softline
interpretation took six and a half centuries to be developed is a mark of the continuing obstinately \softline
rosy view of Virgil and of his role in the poem among its interpreters.  It was only in 1968 that \softline
any commentator tried to find a counterpart for the 'loser'; Giacalone thinks he may correspond to \softline
Dante, because of the poet's many troubles at the hands of his enemies.  Yet it is hard to see how \softline
Dante can be both winner (to whom he is explicitly compared) }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 and}{\plain \fs24 \f1  loser.  One commentator \softline
(Singleton to VI.2) offers the following pronouncement: 'This figure of the loser, though serving \softline
to make the whole scene more graphic, finds no correspondence in the second term of the simile.'  \softline
He is in part correct: both Dante and the crowd of petitioners do correspond to figures within the \softline
simile (winner and the crowd of spectators, respectively); that the reference to Virgil is \softline
suppressed, inviting the reader to supply it, makes it all the more telling.  Reviewing the \softline
commentators, we are able to witness centuries of avoidance behavior as each struggles to \softline
preserve his innocence (e.g., Momigliano, comm. on these verses): the simile is produced 'as a \softline
piece unto itself, with but slight regard for the context').  Maria Picchio Simonelli ("Il giuoco della \softline
zara e i mali d'Italia: lettura del canto VI del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi in memoria di Giorgio \softline
Varanini. I: Dal Duecento al Quattrocento}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Pisa: Giardini ( = }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  21), 1992]), pp. 331-41 , while properly rejecting this argument, goes on to insist on an unlikely solution: the loser is \softline
the city of Florence.   For a reading that takes issue with Singleton and sees that the 'loser' is \softline
undoubtedly Virgil (if without citing his predecessors in this precise understanding), see John \softline
Kleiner ("On Failing One's Teachers: Dante, Virgil, and the Ironies of Instruction," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sparks and \softline
Seeds: Medieval Literature and Its Afterlife [Essays in Honor of John Freccero]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Dana E. \softline
Stewart and Alison Cornish [Turnhout: Brepols, 2000]), pp. 69-70.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For information on the game of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 zara}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (from, according to commentators, Arabic }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 zahr}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a \softline
die, through French }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 hazard}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 azar}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) see Singleton's lengthy gloss (comm. to verse 1).  \softline
Similar to the modern game of craps, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 zara}{\plain \fs24 \f1  involved betting on the numbers, from 3 to 18, \softline
resulting from the cast of three dice.  The numbers 3, 4, 17, and 18 were, like 2 and 12 in the \softline
modern game, 'craps,' or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 zara}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , i.e., an undesirable result -- unless the player called them out \softline
before he threw his dice.  The game was apparently played by two players, as is reflected by \softline
Dante's reference to only a single winner and loser in this passage.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab At verse 8 the reference is to the reward the winner traditionally bestowed upon the \softline
onlookers -- a bit of his winnings (a practice found today in those at gambling tables who tip the \softline
croupier when they conclude their gambling happily).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These six males, all of whom died violently between 1278 and 1297, are presented \softline
as a sort of coda to the three developed figures who bring the preceding canto to its end (Jacopo, \softline
Bonconte, Pia), leaving us with the impression of the potentially more extensive narratives that \softline
might have accompanied their names, with still more resultant pathos.  They also, as Chiavacci \softline
Leonardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Milan: Mondadori, 1994]), p. 173, points 
out, remind us, in their violent deaths, of the unsettled political condition of Italy (even though the \softline
last of them, Pierre de la Brosse, is French), a subject that will dominate the final section of this \softline
canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-14.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Aretine is Benincasa da Laterina.  See Toynbee ("Benincasa d'Arezzo" \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  Jacopo della Lana (comm. to these lines) says that Ghino cut off \softline
Benincasa's head in full view of the assembled papal court of Boniface VIII (ca. 1297) and \softline
somehow managed to make good his escape.  Ghino di Tacco was of a Sienese noble family; \softline
exiled from his city, he became a famous highwayman.  According to Boccaccio (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Decameron}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
X.ii), his nobility of character eventually resulted in his reconciliation with Pope Boniface before \softline
both of them died (in 1303).  In Dante's reference to him here there is no such positive treatment; \softline
Benincasa, not Ghino, is presented as being saved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This brief and unadorned reference is taken by nearly all the early commentators to \softline
refer to Guccio de' Tarlati di Pietramala, a Ghibelline of Arezzo, who was in an attacking party \softline
against the Bostoli, Aretine Guelphs in exile at the fortified castle of Rondine.  Some assert that, \softline
when the forces of the Bostoli counterattacked, Guccio galloped, on a runaway horse, into the \softline
Arno, where he drowned.  Others say that his death occurred while he was in pursuit of the enemy \softline
at that encounter.  (The text would allow either interpretation.)  Still others claim that his death \softline
occurred during the rout of Campaldino, shortly before the presence of the war party at Rondine, \softline
in 1289; but see the next note.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Federico Novello, son of Guido Novello of the Conti Guidi of Romena, in the \softline
Casentino (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.58-61), died when he came to the aid of the Tarlati, \softline
besieging the Bostoli (see preceding note), ca. 1291.  It would seem likely that Dante thought of \softline
both men as dying in the same effort.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The Pisan whom Dante observes is consistently identified, if variously named (Giovanni, \softline
Vanni, Farinata [most of the early commentators right through the nineteenth century], Gano [see \softline
Torraca, comm. to verse 17] -- the last now commonly accepted), as the son of Marzucco degli \softline
Scornigiani, a widely known and respected judge of Pisa until the time of Ugolino's joint rulership \softline
(with archbishop Ruggieri -- see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.1-3) in 1287.  That Ugolino himself was \softline
involved in the pitiless slaying of the son of 'the good Marzucco' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.18) is attested by \softline
various early commentators, e.g., Benvenuto, saying that his source was Giovanni Boccaccio \softline
(comm. to these verses), the Anonimo Fiorentino (comm. to these verses) and John of Serravalle \softline
(comm. to these verses).  Whether the execution (by decapitation) was carried out under \softline
Ugolino's direct orders or not, it occurred in 1287 when Ugolino had returned to Pisa as its co-ruler (with Ruggieri), and necessarily would have been connected, in Dante's mind, with Ugolino's \softline
complicity.  If Dante wrote this scene with that opinion in mind, it helps to explain his ironic \softline
treatment of Ugolino's appeal for pity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Evidence for Marzucco's fortitude is ascribed to one of two anecdotes by the early \softline
commentators: either he astounded Ugolino by his calm demeanor when he, no longer a judge but \softline
a Franciscan novice, asked that the corpse of his son be taken up from the public square and \softline
buried (to which request the much impressed Ugolino assented) or he exemplified Christian \softline
forgiveneness in his decision not to seek revenge for the judicial murder of his son.  Both \softline
anecdotes may, however, be pertinent.  In 1286, before these events, Marzucco had ended his 
long and distinguished career in Pisa as jurist (ca. 1249-86) to become a Franciscan and indeed \softline
eventually resided in the Franciscan house at Santa Croce in Florence from 1291 until his death in \softline
1300 or 1301.  It is possible that Dante knew him and heard of the events in Pisa and of Ugolino's \softline
involvement in them directly from 'lo buon Marzucco' himself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first of these two is Count Orso degli Alberti della Cerbaia, murdered by his \softline
cousin, Count Alberto da Mangona, ca. 1286.  Their respective fathers, Napoleone and \softline
Alessandro degli Alberti da Mangona, have been seen locked in eternal hatred, in Ca{\f3 \'56}na, as \softline
treacherous to kindred in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.40-60.  Like father, like cousin.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The only non-Italian in the group, and the first of them to die (in 1278), is the Frenchman, \softline
Pierre de la Brosse.  As chamberlain of the French king Philip III, Pierre (in 1276) made charges \softline
against the queen, Mary of Brabant, for having poisoned the heir to the throne, Philip's son by his \softline
former queen (Isabella of Aragon), Louis.  Within two years he not only lost his place, as favorite \softline
of the king, but was brutally put to death before the assembled nobles of the court.  The cause of \softline
his shame and death seems to have been, in Dante's mind, the nefarious behavior of the queen, \softline
perhaps in accusing him wrongfully of an attempt upon her chastity.  Dante seems to have \softline
believed the common version of the story, which would put Mary of Brabant (in our day a \softline
province of Belgium) not in purgatory, where her victim has his victory, but in hell (probably in \softline
the last of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Malebolge}{\plain \fs24 \f1  along with Potiphar's wife (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.97) if she failed to repent her \softline
evildoing.  Since she lived almost as long as Dante would (she died on 12 January 1321), one \softline
wonders if she became aware of this warning.  It should also be remembered that Mary's son did \softline
in fact become king of France and that Dante allowed his father salvation (we see Philip III, the \softline
Bold, in ante-purgatorio [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.103-111] but we see him lamenting the reign of his and \softline
Mary's son, Philip IV, the Fair, referred to as 'the plague of France' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.109).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This Pierre, a loyal courtier done in by the envy rampant at his court, reminds Benvenuto \softline
da Imola (comm. to these verses) of Dante's Pier della Vigna (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII), also freed by the poet \softline
from culpability in betraying his king.  But such a judgment fails to consider the far greater \softline
problem of Pier's suicide, which, whatever his guilt with regard to the affairs of the kingdom, \softline
betrayed Christ, a greater King.  Pierre, like Pier, is allowed to speak in his own defense about his \softline
political situation, and Dante allows him, like Pier, his say, without in either case necessarily \softline
accepting their claims as facts.  That this Pierre is saved probably makes his words more \softline
believable -- those on the mountain or in the heavens speak truthfully, as far as we can determine, \softline
in all cases; those in hell are surely less reliable.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Benvenuto's gloss is also responsible for buttressing the myth that Dante actually went to \softline
Paris and there learned the truths of this case.  There is no evidence to support the notion that \softline
such a journey ever occurred.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's leading question puts Virgil on the spot.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.376 the Sibyl \softline
answers Palinurus's request of Aeneas that he have his unburied corpse laid to rest by denying him \softline
such a hope: 'desine fata deum flecti sperare precando' (cease hoping that decrees of the gods may \softline
be turned aside by prayer).  Does this answer compel us to believe that the penitents are deluded \softline
in their hope for the efficacy of prayer?  Dante's question is a necessarily tricky one for Virgil to \softline
have to deal with.  See Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: \softline
Olschki, 1983]), pp. 113-15.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's response seems casuistic, at least in part.  In order not to deny Christians' \softline
belief in the efficacy of prayer, he first of all examines the notion that God's will has been bent by \softline
the desires of others if such prayer be acted upon.  If God's will is won over in an instant by the \softline
loving prayer of others, that is as He wills, and there is only an apparent inconsistency.  He has \softline
merely accepted in immediate payment the 'sum' offered on behalf of the guilty party rather than \softline
insisting on an extended time of solitary penance.  It is a bit difficult to reconcile this formulation, \softline
however, with the actual words in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which seem far less accommodating than this \softline
explanation of them.  When Virgil goes on to explain that, in any case, Palinurus was not praying \softline
to the true God in the passage referred to in Book VI, our credulity is still more gravely tested.  \softline
The statement of the Sibyl is totalizing, while Virgil now reconstructs it to have a meaning that it \softline
never could have had, i.e., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 some}{\plain \fs24 \f1  prayer is effective, some not.  We witness another case in which \softline
the pagan author is forced to pay for his error in rather ungainly ways.  Here Virgil confidently \softline
attacks inadequate Christian readings of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as though }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 they}{\plain \fs24 \f1  were the source of the poem's \softline
theological failure.  'Plain is my writing' indeed!  See Sonia Gentile's discussion of this passage \softline
("La necromanzia di Eritone da Lucano a Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e il "locus inferni": Creazione \softline
letteraria e tradizione interpretativa}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Simona Fo{\f3 \'42} e Sonia Gentili [Rome: Bulzoni, 2000 (= \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi [e testi] italiani}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 [1999])]), pp. 39-43.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Singleton, in his gloss to this passage, is perhaps too open to Virgil's twisting logic.  For \softline
him, Palinurus 'was a pagan, living in the period between the Fall and the Redemption, a time, that \softline
is, in which God's grace (with notable exceptions) was withdrawn from mankind.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXXII.82, 'ma poi che 'l tempo de la grazia venne,' i.e., when grace returned to man through \softline
Christ's sacrifice, which, by clear implication, makes the time before Christ a time "without \softline
grace."'  Yet it was in this time that such as Ripheus and Cato were apparently set apart to be \softline
saved at the harrowing of hell.  These 'notable exceptions' remind us precisely that Virgil was not \softline
one of them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil, having failed to develop a convincing case for his own expertise, now turns \softline
to Beatrice's authority in this matter.  For Beatrice's putative relationship to an allegorical identity \softline
see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.46-48.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In response to Dante's desire to move more quickly toward Beatrice, Virgil warns \softline
that there is more time to be spent on the mountain than Dante imagines.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This figure will shortly (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.74) reveal himself to be Sordello, the thirteenth-century Italian poet, who wrote in Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al.  'Sordello was born (c. 1200) at Goito, village on \softline
the Mincio, about 10 miles NW of Mantua; shortly after 1220 he was resident at the court of \softline
Count Ricciardo di San Bonifazio of Verona, who had married (c. 1222) Cunizza, daughter of \softline
Ezzelino II da Romano (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.32).  In or about 1226, Sordello, with the connivance of her \softline
brother, Ezzelino III (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.109-110), abducted Cunizza, and took her to Ezzelino's court.  \softline
Later he formed a liaison with her, and, to escape her brother's resentment, was forced to take \softline
refuge in Provence, where he made a lengthy stay at the court of Count Raymond Berenger IV \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.134).  There he became acquainted with the Count's seneschal, Romieu de Villeneuve \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.128).  While in Provence (c. 1240) Sordello wrote one of his most important poems, the \softline
lament for Blacatz, one of Count Raymond's Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al barons, from which Dante is supposed to \softline
have taken the idea of assigning to Sordello the function of pointing out the various princes in 
ante-purgatory (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.49-136).  After Count Raymond's death (1245) Sordello remained for \softline
some years at the court of his son-in-law, Charles of Anjou (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.113).  When the latter in \softline
the spring of 1265 set out on his expedition to Italy to take possession of the kingdom of Sicily, \softline
Sordello followed him....  Sordello was among those who shared in the distribution of Apulian \softline
fiefs made by Charles to his Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al barons after his victories over the Hohenstaufen at \softline
Benevento and Tagliacozzo, to Sordello and his heirs being assigned several castles in the \softline
Abruzzi, under deeds dated March and June, 1269.  No further record of Sordello has been \softline
preserved, and the date and place of his death are unknown....  Of Sordello's poems some forty \softline
have been preserved, besides the lament for Blacatz already mentioned, is a lengthy didactic \softline
poem, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ensenhamen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Documentum Honoris}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' (Toynbee, "Sordello" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante \softline
Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Beginning perhaps with Torraca (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.40), commentators have seen \softline
elements of Virgil's Elysian fields and the guide therein, the poet Musaeus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .VI. 666-678), in \softline
Dante's presentation of Sordello.  See Hollander ("Le opere di Virgilio nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Dante," \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la "bella scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f3 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. A. A. Iannucci [Ravenna: \softline
Longo, 1993]), p. 302.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Baranski ("'Sordellus... qui... patrium vulgare deseruit': A Note on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
I, 15, sections 2-6," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Cultural Heritage of the Italian Renaissance: Essays in Honour of T. \softline
G. Griffith}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. C. E. J. Griffiths and R. Hastings [Lewiston: Edwin Mellen Press, 1993]), pp. 23-24, argues that the first two adjectives used in this tercet, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 altera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 disdegnosa}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , often in other \softline
Dantean texts pejorative, reflect Dante's ambiguous attitude toward Sordello, and attempts to \softline
understand this ambiguity as reflecting Dante's sense of Sordello's sinful life and penitent afterlife.  \softline
(But see Benvenuto's understanding [comm. to these verses] that they here reflect Sordello's lofty \softline
mind and indignation at moral turpitude or dishonesty, or Venturi's insistence [comm. to verse 62] \softline
that these are words of praise, not of blame, as when Petrarch [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rime}{\plain \fs24 \f1  105.9-10] praises Laura for \softline
being }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 altera e disdegnosa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and not }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 superba o ritrosa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [prideful or difficult].  In 1894 Poletto \softline
[comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.43-48] saw the clear similarity in the personalities of Farinata and Sordello, \softline
though it would be Croce (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La poesia di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 2nd ed. [Bari: Laterza, 1921]), p. 112, who would \softline
refer to Sordello as 'the Farinata of purgatory.')  Baranski's lengthy argument is centered in his \softline
perception that, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.xv.2), Sordello's decision to abandon his native (Mantuan) \softline
vernacular for Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al constitutes, for Dante, a serious linguistic 'sin,' as is reflected by his \softline
championing of one's own vernacular in chapters x-xiii of the first treatise of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  His view \softline
of Sordello thus necessarily makes him a poet at some distance from Dante and not, as some have \softline
claimed, a 'figure' of Dante.  Against this view see Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1984]), pp. 153-73, who presents Sordello as the sort of 'political poet' who \softline
indeed would strike Dante favorably (as opposed to Bertran de Born).  And for a similar view see \softline
Picone ("All'ombra di Sordello: una lettura di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rassegna europea di letteratura \softline
italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1998]), pp. 62-63.  It is worth considering that Dante may have distanced himself \softline
from his early (negative) view (ca. 1305) of Sordello as he would do with any number of other \softline
judgments that he made in the two earlier works.  See Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: A Life in Works}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [New \softline
Haven: Yale University Press, 2001]), pp. 72, 88-90.  The praise of Sordello's linguistic \softline
excellence here is surely at odds with Dante's denigration of it in the earlier treatise on poetic \softline
language.  To assume that Dante's views in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  accord with those he had expressed \softline
earlier is neither logically nor experimentally a valid procedure.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For Sordello's 'scandalous love life' see Baranski, pp. 20-23 and notes (for bibliography).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-65.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The intensity of the first four sets of encounters on the mountain has varied: the \softline
intense personalness of Manfred was countered by the quizzical distance of Belacqua, which in \softline
turn was balanced by the three intense self-narratives of Jacopo, Bonconte, and Pia.  Sordello \softline
begins with a Belacqua-like reserve, only to be roused to a pitch of excitement by Virgil's \softline
revelation of his Mantuan homeland.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Sordello's pose may recall Genesis 49.9, where Judah, in Jacob's dying blessing, is \softline
described as a couching lion.  Tommaseo was the first commentator to make this suggestion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 68.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's desire for guidance may reflect the function of Musaeus in the parallel scene in \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VI.676), which is to point out the way up the hillock to those gathered in the Elysian \softline
fields.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.40.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As Scartazzini (comm. to this verse) pointed out, Sordello is unable to discern that \softline
Dante is here in the flesh because the sun is behind the mountain (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.55-57) and he \softline
does not cast a shadow.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word 'Mantua' may have been intended, according to Benvenuto da Imola \softline
(followed by John of Serravalle), as the first word of Virgil's own Latin epitaph, 'Mantua me \softline
genuit....'  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.27 and the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.134.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The civic patriotism of Sordello is awakened when Virgil mentions their common \softline
homeland.  Their resulting embrace has been, when coupled with Dante's failed attempt to \softline
embrace Casella (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.76-81), the source of considerable puzzlement when it is considered \softline
along with the decision not to embrace arrived at by Statius and Virgil.  See the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.130-136.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-77.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This passage begins what Benvenuto considers the third part of this canto, 'a \softline
digression against Italy and the principal authors of her desolation.'  Dante himself, at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
VI.128, refers to his 'digressing' here; but no one can possibly imagine that this 'digression' is not \softline
central to his purpose.  (On the subject of Dante's propensity to digress, see Sergio Corsi [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il \softline
"modus digressivus" nella "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Potomac, Md.: Scripta humanistica, 1987)]).  \softline
The poet will directly address Italy herself, the Church, the uncrowned Habsburg emperor Albert, \softline
God, and, finally, Florence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As has long been noted, the sixth canto of each }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is devoted to the treatment of \softline
political issues, those of Florence (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .), of Italy (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .), of the empire (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .) -- though these \softline
subjects are intertwined.  The precise nature of the 'parallelism' among the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the three \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is debated.  An assertion of an 'orthodox' relationship (i.e., 1:1:1) is offered by Shaw ("A \softline
Parallel Structure for the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Stanford Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  7 [1987], pp. 67-76); far \softline
different is that put forward by Kay ("Parallel Cantos in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Res publica \softline
letterarum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  15 [1992], pp. 109-13 and "The Sin(s) of Brunetto Latini," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  112 [1994], \softline
pp. 19-31), who argues that the most distinct parallels occur among the final 33 cantos of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
and the 33 in the other canticles (i.e., 2:1:1 to 34:33:33).  For a different approach, one \softline
privileging parallel episodes, not necessarily reflecting numerical patterns, see Amilcare Iannucci \softline
("Autogenesi dantesca: la tecnica dell' 'epidosio parallelo' nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lettere 
Italiane}{\plain \fs24 \f1  33 [1981], pp. 305-28) and Lloyd Howard (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Formulas of Repetition in Dante's \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2001]).  It seems clear that, while there \softline
are any number of 'parallels' in the poem, Dante avoided any rigorous organization of these.  \softline
Those who have attempted to find the signs of a more regulated system have not done so \softline
convincingly.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bernardino Daniello (comm. to vv. 76-78) was apparently the first to notice the now \softline
often-cited biblical source for Dante's phrase 'donna di provincie' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 princeps provinciarum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in \softline
Lamentations 1:1: 'How does the city sit solitary, that was full of people! how is she become as a \softline
widow! she that was great among the nations, and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 princess among the provinces}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , how is she \softline
become tributary!'  Jeremiah's lament for Jerusalem had been a central reference point for the \softline
death of Beatrice, recorded in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.1.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 83.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The evident recollection of the central image of Ugolino's punishment (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXXII.127-132) may owe its deployment here to the earlier concern with the Ugolino-related \softline
reference to the 'good Marzucco' of Pisa.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.49.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That is, Italy's maritime provinces and her land-locked ones are all at war.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88-89.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The language here clearly derives from Dante's earlier expression of these \softline
sentiments, as Andreoli (comm. to these verses) was perhaps the first to observe, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
IV.ix.10: {\u8219\'27}Thus we might say of the Emperor, if we were to describe his office with an image, that \softline
he is the one who rides in the saddle of the human will.  How this horse pricks across the plain \softline
without a rider is more than evident, especially in wretched Italy, which has been left with no \softline
means whatsoever to govern herself{\u8219\'27} (tr. Lansing).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Justinian, who will have a major role in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VI and VII), is adverted to here as the \softline
emperor who codified Roman law in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Corpus Juris Civilis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The empty chariot of the empire is reflected in the similarly empty chariot of the Church in \softline
the procession of the Church Militant, beset by all its external and internal enemies, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXXII.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The leaders of the Church are accused of having interfered in the civil governance \softline
of Italy, trying to guide its affairs by manipulating its 'bridle' without having allowed the horse's \softline
rider to seat himself in the saddle.  The passage may reflect Dante's unhappiness either with the \softline
intrigues of Pope Boniface VIII, maneuvering to bring about the accession of Albert in 1298, or \softline
with those of Pope Clement V, who managed to control the election of the next emperor, Henry \softline
VII, after the death of 'German Albert' in 1308 -- or with both pontiffs' involvements in imperial \softline
politics.  The language here reflects the biblical text that had greatest currency in the antipapal \softline
political arguments of the time, apparently claiming an indisputable right to govern for the \softline
monarch, Matthew 22:21: 'Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things \softline
that are God's.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reference is to Albert I of Austria, uncrowned emperor for the ten years \softline
(1298-1308) that preceded the election of Henry VII.  It is possible that Dante had in mind, as \softline
punishment of Albert's 'blood,' first the death of his firstborn son, Rudolph, in 1307, and then his 
own in the next year.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The image of Italy as uncontrolled animal, which has been operative since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
VI.89, now culminates in Sordello-like invective (see Maurizio Perugi ["Il Sordello di Dante e la \softline
tradizione mediolatina dell'invettiva," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  55 (1983), pp. 23-135]) against the \softline
Habsburg ruler.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 post-eventum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  prophecy is clearly written after May 1308, but how much later?  \softline
The really difficult question facing anyone who wants to resolve this question involves the identity \softline
of Albert's 'successor.'  Is the reference simply to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 any}{\plain \fs24 \f1  successor who will feel compelled by \softline
pressure to act in Italophile ways?  Or does Dante have Henry VII of Luxembourg, elected in \softline
1308, in mind?  Various commentators (e.g., Tozer, comm. to vv. 101-102; Trucchi, comm. to \softline
vv. 97-105; Momigliano, comm. to vv. 97-105) argue for a date of composition between 1308 \softline
and July 1310, when Henry finally announced his intention of coming to Italy, the 'garden of the \softline
empire.'  If such was the case, Henry had not yet begun his descent into Italy (autumn of 1310) \softline
and the rather cool tone of Dante's appeal for imperial action would make sense.  For after the \softline
emperor's advent, Dante's words about him are, at least at first (Epistle V, composed in the last \softline
quarter of 1310) enormously warm and hopeful.  We would then have three stages in Dante's \softline
responses to Henry: (1) initial dubiety (1308-10), (2) great excitement as the campaign to put \softline
Italy under the governance of a true Roman emperor begins (1310-11), (3) eventual wary \softline
enthusiasm (see the two political letters written in the spring of 1311 [Epistles VI and VII]), given \softline
the precariousness of Henry's military and political situation (1311-13).  (For Dante's political \softline
epistles see Lino Pertile ["Dante Looks Forward and Back: Political Allegory in the Epistles," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  115 (1997), pp. 1-17]; for this view of Dante's changing enthusiasms about Henry's \softline
Italian mission see Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: A Life in Works}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (New Haven: Yale University Press, \softline
2001)], pp. 133-36.)  One attraction of such a view is that it accounts for the tentative and \softline
unimpressed tone of Dante's first reactions to Henry's election, which he very likely might have \softline
known was engineered by Pope Clement V, both in this passage and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.96.  In an \softline
endnote to his commentary on this canto, Porena (to vv. 100-102) argues that, with regard to \softline
Albert, we cannot do more than accept the 1300 date for the action of the poem, when Albert was \softline
still alive, and thus are not free to speculate on the poet's putting into play more than what he \softline
knew then, an argument that is necessarily thwarted by the poet's use of what is clearly }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 post-eventum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  prophecy here (and elsewhere); for a later version of this argument, applying this 'rule' in \softline
other contexts, see Pertile ("Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Beyond the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stilnovo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
13 [1993]), pp. 57-63; for a response to Pertile's argument see Hollander ("Dante's 'dolce stil \softline
novo' and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: mito e poesia. Atti del secondo Seminario dantesco \softline
internazionale, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 ed. M. Picone and T. Crivelli [Florence: Cesati, 1999]), pp. 273-79.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Albert's father is Rudolph of Habsburg -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.94.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The final four tercets of the poet's apostrophe of Albert all begin with mocking \softline
appeals to him to come to Italy (Albert was alive at the imagined date of the poem, 1300) to see \softline
'the garden of the empire laid waste.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These first four names offer evidence of pandemic civil strife, exemplified by the \softline
Montecchi (Ghibellines) and the Guelph Cappelletti (Shakespeare's Montagues and Capulets), two \softline
political factions of the city of Cremona, still bearing the names of their founding families but no 
longer remaining family units (see Singleton, comm. to verse 106).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The Filippeschi, a Ghibelline family of Orvieto, were in continual combat with the Guelph \softline
Monaldeschi.  The former, encouraged by Henry's presence in Italy, attempted to vanquish the \softline
Monaldeschi but failed and were themselves banished from Orvieto in 1312.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In the nineteenth century some historians argued that all four families here referred to \softline
were Ghibelline, each coming from a different Italian city.  In such a view the message Dante is \softline
here urging on Albert is that he be aware of the misfortune of his (Ghibelline) party resulting from \softline
his inaction.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Santafiora, county in the Sienese Maremma, which from Cent. ix down to 1300 \softline
belonged to the powerful Ghibelline family of the Aldobrandeschi, who thence took their title of \softline
Counts of Santafiora.  It wa formerly an imperial fief, but at the time Dante wrote it was in the \softline
hands of the Guelfs of Siena' (Toynbee, "Santafiora" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  We meet one \softline
of the counts of Santafiora, Omberto Aldobrandesco, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.55-72.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The language here reflects the Bible, as commentators since Daniello (comm. to vv. 109-110) have noted, Jesus's words foretelling the destruction of Jerusalem (Luke 21:23), 'For there \softline
shall be great distress (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pressura}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in the land.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's view of Rome's desire to have an emperor in the saddle is obviously at \softline
odds with the typical Guelph view.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Albert's 'people' are the Italians, bereft of their true leader; he would be shamed \softline
were he to hear what they say of him for abandoning them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Jove' is used variously in the poem, a total of nine times (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.52, when \softline
Capaneus addresses the 'actual' Jupiter, the god who took his life; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.45, when the poet \softline
conflates the Christian God and Jove as still menacing the rebellious giants who once attempted to \softline
storm Olympus; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.92, when Virgil refers to Ephialtes' part in that attempt against Jove; \softline
in this passage, where the Christian God alone is meant; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.120, when the poet refers to \softline
Jove's just punishment of Phaeton; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.112, the poet refers to the eagle of empire as the \softline
'bird of Jove'; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.62, where Beatrice names three of the planets; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.95, where the \softline
poet refers to the planet to which he has come; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.145, where the poet again refers to the \softline
planet Jupiter).  Here alone does it refer only to the Christian God (it refers to God as Jupiter in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.45 in a similar usage).  Although the poet realizes that his questioning of divine justice \softline
is out of bounds, he persists in it.  For that justice to be evident, an imperial ruler who would set \softline
things in order would have been sent to govern the earth.  The distracted quality of Dante's \softline
question might, again, indicate that he has heard of Henry's election, but not of his decision to \softline
come to Italy (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.97-102).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab God's plan for Italy, in any case, arises from his divine counsel, which is beyond our \softline
knowing: see Psalm 35:7: 'Iudicia tua abyssus multa' (Your judgments like the great deep), a \softline
citation first offered by Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to vv. 121-123).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Lacking an emperor, Italy is governed by local tyrants, while every yokel who \softline
joins a political party fancies himself the 'new Marcellus.'  But which Marcellus?  The debate \softline
continues.  As Singleton points out, there were three contemporaneous Roman consuls named 
Marcellus and, among these, the most likely to be referred to here is Marcus Claudius Marcellus, \softline
consul in 51 B.C., and renowned for his hatred of Julius Caesar.  It is he to whom Lucan refers \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.313): 'Marcellusque loquax et, nomina vana, Catones' (Marcellus, that man of words, \softline
and Cato, that empty name).  This identification, which is supported by the majority of \softline
commentators (and given a magisterial first exposition by Benvenuto da Imola) and which \softline
apparently makes excellent sense in a context that certainly seems to inveigh against hostility to \softline
the emperor, is at least problematic: Lucan's words are part of Julius Caesar's infamous first \softline
speech to his troops, when he counsels their march on Rome (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.112-113), and they also ridicule Cato the Younger, surely Dante's greatest classical hero.  In fact, the \softline
Lucanian Caesar unites Marcellus, Cato, and Pompey as three of his great enemies.  Dante \softline
probably would have felt that anyone claimed as an enemy by Julius, about to destroy the Roman \softline
republic, was his friend.  It would be strange for Dante to lend himself to Julius's view of these \softline
men, even if he defends the Caesarean inviolability of the eventual emperor and condemns Brutus \softline
and Cassius for murdering him.  In any case, it is perhaps wise to consider other alternatives.  An \softline
early tradition held that the text read 'Metellus' (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.138) and not 'Marcellus,' but this \softline
possibility is no longer seriously considered.  One other Marcellus, however, is worthy of \softline
consideration, Marcus Claudius Marcellus, consul in 222 B.C., successful in skirmishes against \softline
the great Hannibal, conqueror of Syracuse, welcomed back to Rome and referred to as 'the Sword \softline
of Rome,' the best known of all Romans of that name, and indeed mentioned in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.855 as \softline
one of Rome's greatest warriors, presented in the parade of heroes described by Anchises as \softline
preceding that latter-day Marcellus, the Emperor Augustus's adopted and very mortal son.  \softline
Vellutello and Tommaseo (comms. to these verses) both think of Marcus Claudius as the \softline
Marcellus most likely to be mentioned here.  One potential advantage of this solution is that it \softline
broadens the base of Dante's political scorn: if the Marcellus is Lucan's, then only Guelph \softline
bumpkins, hating the emperor, are indicated; if Virgil's, then all enthusiastic amateurs, of whatever \softline
party, who think of themselves as great men.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As Poletto (comm. to these verses) suggests, the reference to 'every clown that plays the \softline
partisan' may very well involve a nasty hidden dig at the Florentines for having given citizenship to \softline
country folk (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.96), the 'new crowd with their sudden profits' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.73).  If so, the \softline
hidden reference serves as a handy transition to the invective against Florence, which immediately \softline
follows.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The fifth and final apostrophe is, naturally, of Florence herself, and is, naturally, \softline
dripping with sarcasm, reminiscent of the earlier apostrophe that opens }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI, in which \softline
the city is asked to rejoice in her renown for having produced so many thieves who now disport \softline
themselves in hell.  For the supposedly 'digressive' nature of Dante's remarks, see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.76-77.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Florentine who shouts 'I'll take it on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 my}{\plain \fs24 \f1  shoulders' is not expressing his respect \softline
for civic virtue so much as masking his intention to promote himself to 'where the action is' under \softline
the guise of humble service.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 148-151.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The obvious sarcasm of the preceding seven tercets in 'praise' of Florence now \softline
yields to a devastating image of the city as wealthy invalid wife, which is perhaps derived from \softline
Augustine's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Confessions}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VI.16), as was first noted by Grandgent (comm. to verse 151).  As 
Augustine nears conversion, at the very end of the sixth book, his soul still struggles to escape \softline
from God, to be free for 'better' things; he describes its inner state as follows: 'Whichever way it \softline
turned, on front or back or sides, it lay on a bed that was hard, for in you alone the soul can rest.'\par
}}