{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 30}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-7.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This first simile in a canto that is heavily similetic seems deliberately difficult.  \softline
Puzzled out, it compares the sevenfold spirit of the Church Triumphant, toward which all in the \softline
procession now turn for guidance as they do above in the Empyrean, to the Little Dipper, which \softline
locates the North Star for earthly navigators.  The first heaven is either that of the moon (starting \softline
upward from earth) or the Empyrean (starting from the other end of Dante's universe).  Since \softline
there are no groups of stars in either of these spheres, we realize immediately that we are here \softline
dealing with metaphoric language.  (Sam Glucksberg's book [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Understanding Figurative \softline
Language: From Metaphors to Idioms}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001)] on figurative \softline
language begins [p. 3] with the story of a colleague of his who, a linguist, was on his way to a \softline
conference in Israel.  Interrogated by security personnel at the airport, he said he was going to a \softline
conference on metaphor.  His interrogator wanted to know what metaphor is.  When the linguist \softline
hesitated, as one might well do, he was dragged away for an hour's worth of detention and \softline
questioning before a local professor could vouch for his credentials and help set him on his way.)  \softline
The sevenfold Spirit of God [see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.64-66]) seems clearly to be identified \softline
with the Holy Spirit, one aspect of the triune God in the Empyrean.  Porena (comm. to vv. 1-9) \softline
points out that the stars of the constellation Ursa (whether Major or Minor) were construed as \softline
seven ploughing oxen, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 septem triones}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as is reflected in Dante's word 'settentr{\f3 \'56}on' (which may \softline
reflect Virgil's 'septem... trioni' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.381).  Sapegno (comm. to verse 1) noted that \softline
Dante had already (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rime}{\plain \fs24 \f1  C.29) referred to 'le sette stelle gelide unquemai' (referring to Europe, \softline
located in the hemisphere that 'never [loses] the seven freezing stars'), translating Boethius's \softline
'septem gelidi triones' (seven frigid oxen -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cons}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.6m.10), also cited (later) in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
II.viii.13.  This higher sevenfold spirit, unlike Ursa Minor, never rises or sets but is constantly \softline
glowing with charity; it is also never hidden by a clouded sky, even though it is not visible to us \softline
because we exist in a 'cloud' of our own sinfulness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The twenty-four elders, representing the Old Testament, turn toward the chariot as \softline
to the awaited messiah who, in His first coming, crowned their time of militance with peace and \softline
who now will come in Judgment.  See Ephesians 2:14, 'Ipse enim est pax nostra' (For He is our \softline
peace), a text cited by Singleton (comm. to verse 9).  Since the procession in the garden \softline
represents the Church Triumphant, the mystical body of Christ }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 after}{\plain \fs24 \f1  its progress through history, \softline
it seems advisable to realize that we deal here with a scene that is meant to reflect the final advent \softline
of Christ for the Day of Judgment.  See Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Harvard \softline
University Press, 1967 (1958)]), pp. 72-85, citing St. Bernard on the three advents of Christ \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Patrologia Latina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  183, col. 35ff.).  See also Thomas Merton ("Le Sacrement de l'Avent dans la \softline
spiritualit{\f2\u233\'e9} de saint Bernard," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dieu Vivant}{\plain \fs24 \f1  23 [1953], pp. 23-43), Mark Musa (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Advent at the \softline
Gates}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1974]), and the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.103-108.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The elder who sings alone is clearly the Song of Songs, whether the book itself or \softline
its 'author,' Solomon, his words repeating the phrasing 'Veni..., veni..., veni' of the Canticle of \softline
Canticles 4:8 ('Come from Lebanon, my bride, come from Lebanon, come').  We would be \softline
forgiven if we believed we were about to witness a wedding ceremony of some kind, featuring \softline
Beatrice in the role of bride.  A strange 'wedding' it will turn out to be, characterized by tears 
more than by smiles.  In fact, no canto in the poem displays more words for weeping than this one \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII has exactly as many): }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lagrime}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (vv. 91, 145), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lagrimando}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (54),}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  piangere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (56, 57, \softline
107, 141).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Eugenio Chiarini ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XXX,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le \softline
Monnier, 1967]), p. 1112, points out that these verses constitute the longest sentence (12 lines) in \softline
the poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reference is to the trumpet blast that will summon the souls of the dead to \softline
judgment (I Corinthians 15:52).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The word 'hallelujah' seems so familiar that it may be surprising to discover that it occurs \softline
(and occurs four times) only in a single biblical text, the nineteenth chapter of John's Book of \softline
Revelation, where the saints (Apoc. 19:1, 19:3), the elders and the four gospel beasts (Apoc. \softline
19:4), and a great multitude (Apoc. 19:6, reasonably understood as the souls of the blessed, to \softline
whom, in fact, Dante refers here) all cry out this word in welcome of the coming reign of the true \softline
God and of his Judgment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab There have been and remain disputes about the words }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 voce}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (voice) and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alleluiare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as well \softline
as the grammatical construction in verse 15.  We have followed Petrocchi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Commedia secondo \softline
l'antica vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Lettere, 1994 (1966)], vol. I, Introduzione), pp. 218-20, in \softline
agreement with the decisions he has made, which seem all the stronger for being in complete \softline
accord with the gloss found in Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to vv. 13-18): the saved souls will \softline
sing songs of praise with the restored bodily instruments they possessed in their first lives.  The \softline
manuscript tradition produced two major variants here, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alleviare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (to lighten) rather than \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alleluiare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (to sing hallelujah), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 carne}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (flesh) rather than }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 voce}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Some also question (e.g., Chiavacci \softline
Leonardi [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Milan: Mondadori, 1994)], p. 903) the \softline
notion that Dante is here using a rare (for him) ablative absolute, as most believe he in fact is.  In \softline
order to support that reading, such as Chiavacci Leonardi must interpret the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alleluiare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to \softline
mean 'to make beautiful with a hallelujah,' which, given the context of Revelation 19, seems \softline
palliative, a rather latter-day pre-Raphaelite reading of the verse.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As will arise all those who will be saved at the Last Judgment, a hundred angels \softline
('ministers and messengers of life eternal') rise up upon the chariot itself to welcome Beatrice, \softline
who, in a moment, will come to it.  Where do these angels come from?  We are not told whether \softline
they suddenly manifest themselves upon the chariot now just as Beatrice comes, or descended \softline
from the Empyrean with her, or with the chariot when it came to show itself to Dante in Eden.  \softline
See the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXI.77-78 and XXXII.89-90.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab These Beatricean angels have a pre-history.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.7 Dante imagines \softline
Beatrice's death and sees a band of angels who return with her to heaven, mounting after a little \softline
white cloud, and singing 'Osanna in altissimis.'  Charles Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia, Elements of \softline
Structure}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1965 (1954)]), p. 57, was perhaps the first to \softline
make the necessary connections between that scene and this one.  This procession began with \softline
voices singing 'Hosanna' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.51); Beatrice returns with her host of angels and again she \softline
is obscured by a cloud.  The affinities between the two scenes and the Bible are even more \softline
suggestive than Singleton noticed.  In the prose of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII Dante says that he seemed \softline
to hear the words 'Osanna in excelsis.'  The precise phrase occurs -- strange as it may seem, given \softline
its familiarity -- only once in the Latin New Testament, in Mark 11:10.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab These verses draw Dante's imagining of Beatrice's departure from this life in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
into obvious relation to his presentation of her return to earth here in the garden of Eden.  In both \softline
cases the word 'Hosanna' associates her with Christ's triumphal entry into Jerusalem: in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita \softline
nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the New Jerusalem that is life eternal in the Empyrean; here, a triumphant descent to earth \softline
modeled on Christ's return in judgment.  It is thus that one can answer Peter Armour's question \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Griffin and the History of the World: A Study of the Earthly Paradise ["Purgatorio" \softline
XXIX-XXXIII]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1989], pp. 56-58): if Beatrice represents Christ (and Armour \softline
believes that she does), then how can the griffin also do so?  The griffin stands for Christ as the \softline
equivalent of his Church, His mystical body, represented by the chariot.  The reader might imagine \softline
a film version of this scene, with all the 'characters' in the procession (but not Dante and Matelda -- or Statius and Virgil) as cartoon figures, and Beatrice played by a living actress.  The Church \softline
Triumphant, appearing on this unique occasion in the earthly paradise for the instruction of Dante, \softline
is otherwise always located in the Empyrean (whence it will descend for his instruction in \softline
actuality, not only symbolically, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII), awaiting a future and final series of events.  \softline
Beatrice comes as Christ will come in that future, in the Second Coming (his third advent -- see \softline
the note to vv. 8-9).  This temporal distinction helps us to understand that there is indeed a \softline
difference between the symbolic griffin and Beatrice as figure of Christ to come in judgment, that \softline
there is not a question of 'two Christs,' but of two differing kinds of representation of the same \softline
Christ.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.89-90 we learn that the griffin has returned to the Empyrean, \softline
leaving Beatrice and the chariot behind in the garden, now representing the Church Militant's \softline
career from its founding into the fourteenth century.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The rare word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 basterna}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has caused difficulty.  Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 13-18) says \softline
that it is a vehicle made of soft skins, used to transport noble women; he suggests that it fits the \softline
context here because it is drawn by two animals (this chariot, he notes, is pulled by a two-natured \softline
beast) and because Beatrice is the most noble of women.  According to Servius's gloss of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
VIII.666 (cited first by Lombardi [comm. to this verse] and then by Trucchi [comm. to vv. 13-21]), the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 basterna}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was a cart, festooned with veils, found in Gaul, where it was used to transport \softline
chaste matrons to sacred festivals.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 17.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Latin phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ad vocem tanti senis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (at the words of so great an elder) is Dante's \softline
own, opening a series of three rhyming Latin endings of lines, the next two from Mark and Virgil \softline
respectively.  The effect is to make three Latin 'authors,' Dante, Mark, and Virgil, each contribute \softline
part of a Latin verse for the advent of Beatrice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's hundred angels cite the first of the two master texts for this poem found in \softline
this tercet, the Bible and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  The clause 'Bless{\f3 \'50}d are you who come' (with the adjective \softline
given a startling masculine ending, not the feminine that would seem a more fitting \softline
accompaniment to Beatrice) is derived from the account of Christ's entry into Jerusalem found in \softline
Mark 11:9-10: 'And they that went before, and they that followed, cried, saying, "Hosanna; \softline
Bless{\f3 \'50}d is he that comes (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Benedictus qui venit}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in the name of the Lord.  Bless{\f3 \'50}d be the kingdom \softline
of our father David, that comes in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest" (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Hosanna in \softline
excelsis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).'  While Matthew (31:9) and John (12:13) also report the 'Hosanna' and the blessedness \softline
of him who comes in fulfilment of the prophecy in Zechariah 9:9, only Mark has the words almost \softline
exactly as Dante has them in this passage and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.7 (see the note to vv. 16-18 
and Hollander ["Dante's Use of the Fiftieth Psalm," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  91 (1973)], p. 146).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante could just as easily have said 'benedicta' as 'benedictus'; neither rhyme nor meter \softline
forced his hand.  We must therefore understand that the scandalous regendering of Beatrice \softline
caused by the correct citation of Mark's gospel is deliberate.  It seems clear that the poet wants his \softline
reader to realize that her meaning, her eventual identity, is totally involved in Christ.  And thus she \softline
comes as Christ, not as herself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 20.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The angelic strewing has reminded commentators, at least since the time of Daniello \softline
(comm. to vv. 19-21), of the strewing of palm fronds in the path of Jesus on what became known \softline
as Palm Sunday.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Latin is Virgilian (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.883): 'Give lilies with full hands.'  This is the climax of \softline
Anchises' tearful and prophetic speech about the future of Rome and the dreadful loss of \softline
Marcellus, the adoptive son of Augustus who was to rule Rome after the emperor's death, but \softline
who beat his 'father' to the grave.  In Virgil's text the lilies are flowers of mourning; in Dante's \softline
they seem rather to be associated with (according to Pietro di Dante [comm. to verse 20]) the \softline
Song of Songs (2:1), when the bride describes herself as the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lilium convallium}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 'lily of the valley,' \softline
a wildflower, not a cultivated plant.  Dante will later associate lilies with the Apostles (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXIII.74).  Traditionally, a flowering bough in the form of a lily was borne by the angel Gabriel in \softline
depictions of the Annunciation, denoting the chastity of Mary (see Fallani's comment to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXXII.112).  It seems clear that here the lilies are relocated symbolically, losing their tragic tone \softline
for a 'comic' and celebratory one; they have a positive and redemptive valence, not the funerary \softline
significance that they have in Virgil's line.  At the same time, for those of us who are thinking of \softline
Virgil as well as of Beatrice, they do underline our (and soon Dante's) sadness at this 'death' of \softline
Virgil in the poem.  In that respect the verse functions in both a 'Beatricean' and a 'Virgilian' \softline
mode.  For a remarkably 'Dantean' and Christian reading of Virgil's verse by St. Ambrose, see \softline
Lino Pertile (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La puttana e il gigante: Dal Cantico dei Cantici al Paradiso Terrestre di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Ravenna: Longo, 1998]), p. 64.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This is the closest Dante comes to giving a piece of Virgil's Latin text an uninterrupted \softline
verbatim presence in his poem.  His Italian 'oh,' however, does interrupt the flow of the Virgilian \softline
line.  It seems more than possible that the exclamation is spoken, since it is uttered by her angels, \softline
to mark the moment of Beatrice's appearance on the chariot.  This may also be the moment at \softline
which Virgil disappears -- although that hypothesis is perhaps less sustainable.  That the Italian \softline
interjection 'oh!' is meant to reflect Isidore of Seville's description (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etym}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.xiv) of interjections \softline
(literally, according to Isidore, words placed between other words) as being difficult to translate \softline
into any other language, see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Florence: Olschki, 1983]), p. 143, n. 46.  The fact that Virgil's sad and beautiful Latin line is \softline
interrupted by an Italian interjection was probably dictated by more than the metrical requirements \softline
of Dante's hendecasyllabic line.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This third simile in the canto, when compared with the convoluted first one, is \softline
simplicity itself, as though Beatrice's presence itself called for a less self-conscious artistry on the \softline
part of the poet.  Nonetheless, once again Dante's beloved is associated, at least intrinsically, by \softline
the iconography of the rising sun, with Christ.  For a discussion of this and many other of the \softline
poet's similarly ineffable experiences in the earthly paradise see Giusppe Ledda (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La guerra della 
lingua}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 2002]), pp. 223-42.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice, described first by her apparel, is crowned with the olive branch, \softline
traditionally symbolic of peace but also associated with wisdom, since the olive was sacred to the \softline
goddess of wisdom, Minerva.  The three colors that she wears associate her with faith (white), \softline
hope (green), and charity (red), the three theological virtues we have already seen in the \softline
procession (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.121-126).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice died in June of 1290; it is now either the end of March or early April of \softline
1300 (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.1) and thus about two months fewer than ten years since she died.  If \softline
the action of the poem indeed did begin, in Dante's mind, on Friday 25 March 1300 (see the note \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.94-105), this day is Wednesday 30 March 1300 or 3/30/1300, literally a perfect day, a \softline
ten composed of three threes (Beatrice's number in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.3 is nine, or three squared).  For a \softline
recent study of the numerological aspects of Beatrice see Carlo Vecce ("Beatrice e il numero \softline
amico," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Beatrice nell'opera di Dante e nella memoria europea 1290-1990}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Maria Picchio \softline
Simonelli [Florence: Cadmo, 1994], pp. 101-35).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Virgil had been overcome by }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stupore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (amazement) a short while ago (see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.55-57); now it is Dante's turn.  Not even the man who wrote of Beatrice can \softline
encompass the fact of her miraculous nature now that he finally experiences it directly and \softline
completely.  It will take him another }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  adequately to understand what she means.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The line is clearly reminiscent (if the reminiscence was apparently only first noted by \softline
Torraca in 1905 [comm. to vv. 34-39]) of the opening of Dante's lyric (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rime}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XCI), 'Io sento s{\f3 \'58} \softline
d'Amor la gran possanza' (So much do I feel Love's mighty power).   Just as was the case with \softline
Matelda (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII.43-48), Dante's concupiscent memories and thoughts are \softline
at odds with the nature of Beatrice.  Yes, she looks exactly like the woman with whom he fell in \softline
love in Florence; but now it is clear (as it should have been then) that she loves him only in Christ.  \softline
This distinction will be insisted on at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.7-9.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The difference in the loves represented by the earlier poem (composed in the middle years \softline
of the 1290s?) and by this one is emblematized by the capital letter of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Amor}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Love, as in 'the god \softline
of Love,' Cupid) in the first, and its absence here.  It is, of course, impossible to know whether \softline
either or both of these words for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 amor}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was in fact capitalized by Dante, especially since questions \softline
of punctuation and of capitalization in medieval manuscripts are simpy not resolvable (except, \softline
perhaps, when we have an autograph to guide us).  All one can say is that modern editors have \softline
done well in this instance, that it would make sense for Dante to have done as they have.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For Dante's earlier references to his first being smitten by Beatrice while he was \softline
still in his childhood, in fact in his ninth year (i.e., while he was still eight), see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.2 \softline
(Andreoli [comm. to verse 42]); }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.7 (Poletto [comm. to vv. 41-48]); and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rime}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
CXI.1-2 (Singleton [comm. to verse 42]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The logistics of the movement of the little band of poets (Dante, Virgil, Statius) \softline
requires that, since Dante has turned 90}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to face the pageant across the narrow stream, and since \softline
they had been proceeding due east, Virgil is behind him, and thus to his left.  Had the directions \softline
necessitated Virgil's being to his right, it seems likely that Dante might have chosen not to indicate 
that.  His turning to the left -- the morally less acceptable side -- in Virgil's direction gives further \softline
grounds for Beatrice's reproof.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Again Virgil is thought of as a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mamma}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , that strikingly 'vernacular' word we have heard \softline
applied to him before (in company with the same rhyme words) in the salutation addressed to him \softline
by Statius (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.95-99 and the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.97-99).  See also }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.9 \softline
and the note to XXXII.1-9.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Virgil, it may seem, is strangely feminized in Dante's gesture toward him.  However, if we \softline
consider his nurturing role in the eyes of the protagonist, the term is less disturbing.  And once we \softline
observe Dante's attempt to deal with Beatrice's asperity and her 'masculine' demeanor, we can see \softline
that the dynamic of this scene is built upon the reversal of gender roles, Virgil now seeming gentle \softline
and mothering, while Beatrice, coming as Christ in judgment (see the note to vv. 16-18), like an \softline
admiral (see verse 58 and note), seems more like an unforgiving father.  Whatever contemporary \softline
theoreticians of gender and of 'gendered writing' may choose to make of this, it must first be \softline
observed that the reversals of a usual set of expectations make sense in the economy of the scene.  \softline
For a concise guide to Dante's adventures at the hands of practitioners of the 'new new criticism' \softline
of the second half of the twentieth century, see Gary Cestaro, "Theory and Criticism \softline
(Contemporary)," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Dante Encyclopedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (ed. Richard Lansing [New York: Garland, 2000), \softline
pp. 815-818.  His list includes 'American New Criticism, structuralism, reader response theory, \softline
semiotics, post-structuralism and deconstruction, Marxist critique, psychoanalysis, feminism, race \softline
and gender studies, queer theory.'  His examples and bibliography furnish an excellent starting \softline
point for anyone interested in pursuing such lines of inquiry.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Lombardi (comm. to this verse), against the grain of the more usual understanding of \softline
this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 hapax}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which holds that the word means 'uncertainty,' or 'hopeful expectation,' says that it \softline
here is a noun formed from the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 respirare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (to breathe), here in the sense that indicates the \softline
panting breath of a terrified child.  Campi (comm. to vv. 43-45) suggests that this is, if ingenious, \softline
a forced reading, and prefers that of Bianchi (comm. to this verse) who locates the source of \softline
Dante's rhyme word in Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 respieit}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or 'trust.'  Scartazzini (comm. to this verse) accepts this \softline
reading but criticizes Bianchi for not having credited Vincenzo Nannucci (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Voci e locuzioni \softline
italiane derivate dalla lingua provenzale}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Firenze, 1840, pp. 121-123).  We have followed \softline
Nannucci's and Bianchi's interpretation in our translation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 47.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a possible citation here of the sestina of Arnaut Daniel, 'Lo ferm voler,' in \softline
particular verses 4-6 of its second stanza, 'Non ai membre no.m fremisca, neis l'ongla, / Aissi cum \softline
fai l'enfas denant la verga, / Tal paor ai que.ill sia trop de m'arma,' see Marianne Shapiro \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX: Arnaut at the Summit," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  100 [1982], pp. 71-76).  She translates \softline
the verses as follows: 'I have no member that does not tremble, not even my fingernail, like a child \softline
before the rod.  So much do I fear that I am hers too much in soul.'  In support of Shapiro's \softline
hypothesis that Dante indeed did know and use Arnaut's sestina, about which, perhaps from some \softline
'anxiety of influence,' he is officially silent, one can point, in addition to the fact that he himself \softline
chose to write a sestina ('Al poco giorno'), to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.2, 'm'addormentai come un \softline
pargoletto battuto lagrimando' (I went to sleep, weeping like a little boy who has been beaten \softline
[Dante had just been denied the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 salute}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Beatrice]), and to what seems an even clearer citation in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.24, where Cerberus 'non avea membro che tenesse fermo' (There was no part of him \softline
he held in check), as was first noted by Mazzoni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto VI dell'"Inferno"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture 
dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1967]), p. 53.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This verse is a translation of Dido's climactic utterance admitting that she has fallen in \softline
love with Aeneas, thus breaking her vows of chastity to her dead husband, Sichaeus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.23): \softline
'Agnosco veteris vestigia flammae' (I recognize the traces of the ancient flame).  For a lengthy \softline
consideration of this celebrated verse see Roberto Mercuri ("'Conosco i segni dell'antica fiamma,'" \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cultura neolatina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  31 [1971], pp. 237-93).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Near the conclusion of Virgil's tragic fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgic}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (vv. 525-527), Orpheus's \softline
severed head cries out to his lost Eurydice.  It is a moment that could define the tragic spirit, a \softline
decapitated voice giving vent to Orpheus's misery at the loss of his wife:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab ...Eurydicen vox ipsa et frigida lingua,\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab a miseram Eurydicen! anima fugiente vocabat,\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Eurydicen toto referebant flumine ripae.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab ...'Eurydice' that very voice and frozen tongue,\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 'Oh wretched Eurydice!' it called as the soul escaped,\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 'Eurydice' the banks gave back along the stream.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 It seems more than clear that Dante's three-verse farewell to Virgil is modeled on Orpheus's three-verse farewell to Eurydice.  While surprisingly few twentieth-century commentators have heard \softline
that echo in these lines, even they seem unaware that it had been heard a few centuries ago \softline
(ca.1568) by Bernardino Daniello (comm. to these verses), as was pointed out by Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il \softline
Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1983]), pp.132-34.  Now that \softline
we have a published text of the commentary of Trifon Gabriele (ca. 1525, comm. to verse 49), we \softline
can see that he was the first to notice this clear citation.  He was echoed by his student, Daniello, \softline
who, however, as was fairly often the case, failed to acknowledge his teacher's teaching.  It was \softline
only cited again, once more without citation of earlier notice, in 1900 by Scartazzini (comm. to \softline
vv. 50-51).  Edward Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Scripture and Classical Authors in \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 (1896)]), pp. 20-21, 177-178, also discusses this 'beautiful and \softline
touching' citation, and those few who do refer to an earlier source in recent years (e.g., Singleton \softline
[comm. to these verse]; Mazzotta [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Poet of the Desert}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Princeton: Princeton University \softline
Press, 1979)], p. 186; Chiavacci Leonardi [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Milan: \softline
Mondadori, 1994)], pp. 888-89) refer only to Moore.  Still others cite the passage with little or no \softline
reference to those who had in fact discovered the quotation, e.g., John Freccero (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: The \softline
Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Rachel Jacoff [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986]), in \softline
"Manfred's Wounds" (1983), p. 208; Guglielmo Gorni ("Beatrice agli Inferi," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Omaggio a \softline
Beatrice (1290-1990)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. R. Abardo [Florence: Le Lettere, 1997]), p. 156 (citing Vandelli's \softline
resuscitation of Scartazzini's commentary, but apparently unaware of the ancient lineage of the \softline
citation).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Freccero, pp. 207-8, has noted a program of 'effacement' in Dante's three citations of \softline
Virgil here.  In verse 21 a Latin quotation; in verse 48 a literal Italian translation; in these lines, \softline
what he characterizes as 'the merest allusion.'  This last may seem a bit too 'effacing.'  See \softline
Hollander ("Le opere di Virgilio nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la "bella scola" della 
poesia: Autorit{\f3 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. A. A. Iannucci [Ravenna: Longo, 1993]), pp. 249, 317-18, \softline
who believes it is a full-fledged citation.  See also Antonio St{\f2\u228\'e4}uble ("Beatrice ritrovata.  Il sistema \softline
delle citazioni in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX, 1-47," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Carmina semper e citharae cordi.  {\f2\u201\'c9}tudes de \softline
philologie et de m{\f2\u233\'e9}trique offertes {\f3 \'42} Aldo Menichetti}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. M. C. G{\f2\u233\'e9}rard-Zai, P. Gresti, S. Perrin, \softline
P. Vernay, M. Zenari [Geneva: Editions Slatkine, 2000], pp. 315-22) for a discussion of some of \softline
these citations.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the provisional hypothesis that Dante does not develop his persona as Orpheus in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  because he has in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.1.1) presented Orpheus as non-historical, as the very \softline
example of poetic allegory's fictive practice, see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969], p. 47n.; "Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Theologus-Poeta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
94 [1976], pp. 119-20).  This is to counter the opinion of Zygmunt Baranski ("Notes on Dante \softline
and the Myth of Orpheus," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: mito e poesia. Atti del secondo Seminario dantesco \softline
internazionale, }{\plain \fs24 \f1 ed. M. Picone and T. Crivelli [Florence: Cesati, 1999]), p. 140n., that 'Dantists \softline
have failed to acknowledge the peculiarity of the poet's choice of Orpheus as an illustrative \softline
example of "poetic allegory."'  See also Guglielmo Gorni ("Beatrice agli Inferi," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Omaggio a \softline
Beatrice (1290-1990)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. R. Abardo [Florence: Le Lettere, 1997]), pp. 153-58, for the notion \softline
that Dante indeed means us to read him as the 'new' Orpheus.  For a possible earlier instance of \softline
Dante's identifying himself with Orpheus, see Paola Rigo ("La discesa agli Inferi nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita \softline
Nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in her }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Memoria classica e memoria biblica in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1994]), p. 31, \softline
arguing that Dante's self-starting tongue in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.1 reflects Virgil's phrase 'vox ipsa et \softline
frigida lingua' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.525) describing Orpheus as he begins his lament.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 50.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the suggestion that Dante's loss of Virgil resembles Aeneas's loss of Anchises, see \softline
the remark of Earl Jeffrey Richards cited in Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1983]), p. 143, n. 47, and Hollander ("Le opere di Virgilio nella \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la "bella scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f3 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. A. A. \softline
Iannucci [Ravenna: Longo, 1993]), p. 317, n. 298, pointing to the appositeness of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.710-711: 'I lose my father, Anchises,... best of fathers, you leave me to my weariness.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sense of this verse is that all that Eve lost and Dante has now regained could not \softline
ease his pain at the loss of Virgil.  Kevin Brownlee ("Dante, Beatrice, and the Two Departures \softline
from Dido," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  108 [1993], pp. 1-14), in an essay dedicated to his student \softline
Lauren Scancarelli Seem, who is credited with having developed the hypothesis Brownlee puts \softline
forward, argues that the departures of Virgil and eventually Beatrice as his guides are both \softline
modeled on the scenes involving Aeneas's two departures from Dido in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.441-449; \softline
VI.467-473).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's tears have reminded a number of readers, beginning with Tommaseo (comm. \softline
to vv. 55-57), of the tears of Boethius that were wiped away by Lady Philosophy in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Consolation of Philosophy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.ii(pr). See also Edward Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , First Series: \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Scripture and Classical Authors in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 (1896)]), p. 286, who speaks \softline
of the overall applicability of this passage to the situation in Dante's text; Scartazzini (comm. to \softline
verse 73); Poletto (comm. to vv. 67-75); Carroll (comm. to vv. 109-145); and Casini/Barbi \softline
(comm. to verse 73).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This verse is perhaps the climax of the poem.  Everything before it leads here.  And \softline
once Dante is named, his new mission begins to take form, first as Beatrice has him cleanse \softline
himself of his past crimes and misdemeanors.  (His 'vacation' in the garden of Eden is over.)  For \softline
the uniqueness of this self-nomination, see the note to v. 63, below.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For an attempt to deal with the postponement of the naming of the protagonist until this \softline
sixty-fourth canto of the poem (both Virgil [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.79] and Beatrice [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.70] are identified as \softline
soon as they appear), see Dino Cervigni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poetry of Dreams}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1986]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is in response to this verse that Dante's son Pietro offered his celebrated 'etymology' of \softline
his father's Christian name (comm. to verse 55): '...nominatus erat auctor Dantes, ita dabat, sive \softline
dedit se ad diversa; scilicet primo ad theologiam, secundo ad poetica' (the author was named \softline
Dante, as in 'he was giving' or 'he gave' himself to diverse things, first of all to theology and then \softline
to poetry).  Hollander uses this passage as epigraph to his study "Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Theologus-Poeta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 " (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  94 [1976], pp. 91-136) as part of an insistence that the conventional term for more 'usual' \softline
poets who deal with lofty subjects, 'poeta-theologus,' needed to have its terms reversed \softline
('theologus-poeta') for Dante in order to respect his unique self-presentation as one whose poetry \softline
meets the criteria of theological truth unswervingly and directly -- or so he encourages us to \softline
believe.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 56-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The thrice-repeated verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 piangere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (weep) offered by Beatrice in reproof to Dante \softline
echoes and rebukes the thrice-repeated plangent calling of Virgil's name by Dante in vv. 49-51. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 For a wide-ranging meditation on the possible references of Beatrice's 'sword,' see Wayne Storey, \softline
"The Other Sword of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  107 (1989), pp. 85-99.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This striking and unsettling similetic presentation of Beatrice as admiral has drawn a \softline
mixed press.  It is all very well to argue, as Hollander has done (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), pp. 122-23, 159, 190, that Dante has prepared for \softline
this moment by staging a significant series of voyages within the poem in which he calls attention \softline
to a commanding officer standing on a poopdeck.  (The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 poppa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  appears at some highly \softline
charged moments: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.124, when Ulysses turns his poopdeck away from the east and \softline
XXVI.140, when the poop of his sinking vessel rises from the swallowing sea before its final \softline
plunge; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.43, the afterdeck upon which the 'heavenly pilot' stands as the saved souls come \softline
to shore; and now, in its penultimate appearance in the poem, the place where Beatrice seems to \softline
stand as she joins the pageant.  The word will appear only once more, at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.146, in the \softline
last world-prophecy in the poem, when an eventually benevolent storm at sea will set our erring \softline
'fleet' right, turning our poops to where our prows had been in our misdirected quests.)  'Admiral \softline
Beatrice' seems, nonetheless, a bit overdone to most of Dante's readers, including John Scott \softline
("Dante's Admiral," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  27 [1972], pp. 28-40), who, like Hollander, sees the necessary \softline
theological trappings of her role, but is not altogether happy with the resultant poetic image.  Joy \softline
Potter ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Beatrice Ammiraglio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.58-66," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italiana: Selected Papers from the \softline
Proceedings of the Third Annual Conference of the American Association of Teachers of Italian, \softline
December 27-28, 1986}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Albert N. Mancini, Paolo Giordano, and Pier Raimondo Baldini \softline
[River Forest, Illinois: Rosary College, 1988], pp. 97-108) tries to reassure us that, given the \softline
allegorical nature and meaning of Beatrice, her appearance is only disconcerting to post-Romantic \softline
readers, while, in the same year but in a very different critical ambience, Jeffrey Schnapp ("Dante's \softline
Sexual Solecisms: Gender and Genre in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Romanic Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  79 [1988], pp. 143-63) 
considers the gender reversal present here part of a meditation upon such issues as the \softline
relationship between the 'feminine' world of vernacular lyric and the 'masculine' one of Latin epic.  \softline
It still would seem reasonable to conclude that the poet expected his readers to be jolted by this \softline
simile's defeminization of Beatrice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab No other segment of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is as filled with similes as the first ninety-nine verses \softline
of this canto; there are seven in all.  And they take up more than half of the text, fully fifty-five \softline
lines of it.  This one (and we will not be confronted by another in this canto) is clearly meant to be \softline
read as climactic.  If we are troubled by Dante's 'Admiral Beatrice,' we must also realize that the \softline
poet has chosen to disturb us in this way.  Everything conspires to make us understand one \softline
absolutely essential thing: our author has gone out of his way to make us comprehend that, \softline
whatever appreciation Dante had of Beatrice in life, and however he remembered her after her \softline
death, despite what perhaps should have been something like a full and final revelation in the last \softline
chapter of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , he fell short of understanding her true nature -- and thus the way he \softline
then should have and now must love her.  As we shall see, even at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.9 he still \softline
loves her as he used to, and is rebuked by the ladies representing the theological virtues for doing \softline
so.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's insistence that he names himself only from necessity echoes a passage in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.ii.12-14), in which Dante says that there are two reasons that excuse an author's \softline
speaking of himself: first, and as in the case of Boethius's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Consolatio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , in order to defend oneself \softline
from harm or against infamy; second, as in the case of Augustine's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Confessions}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , in order to bring \softline
greatly useful instruction to others.  Freccero (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Rachel \softline
Jacoff [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986]), in his article "Dante's Prologue Scene" \softline
(1966), deals with the Augustinian confessional mode as modeling and justifying Dante's own (pp. \softline
1-3).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab There was a tradition honored by many classical and medieval writers that one should only \softline
name oneself at the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 incipit}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and/or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 explicit}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of one's work (i.e., 'Here begins [or concludes] the \softline
such-and-such of so-and-so').  Years ago the present writer (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1983], p. 133, n. 24) thought that he had discovered a notable \softline
fact.  It is widely appreciated that Dante only named himself once in the body of any of his \softline
extended works, here in verse 55.  What had not been noted was that his self-nomination echoed \softline
the only self-nomination found in the extended works of Virgil, indeed in the very }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgic}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(IV.563, 'Vergilium') that Dante had cited a few lines earlier (vv. 525-527 at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.49-51).  \softline
With the publication of Trifon Gabriele's commentary (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annotationi nel Dante fatte con M. Trifon \softline
Gabriele in Bassano}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Lino Pertile [Bologna: Commissione per i testi di lingua, 1993 \softline
(1525-27) -- now included in the Dartmouth Dante Project]), it became apparent that at least one \softline
earlier commentator had made the same discovery in his comment to this verse, where he says \softline
that (comm. to verse 63), in naming himself, Dante wished to imitate Virgil's self-nomination \softline
('volendo imitar Virgilio... }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 illo Vergilium me tempore}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ').  See also Boccaccio's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Amorosa visione}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
where Boccaccio signs himself 'Giovanni di Boccaccio da Certaldo' in one of the acrostic sonnets \softline
that begin that work -- the only occurrence of Boccaccio's name in his ten Italian extended \softline
fictions.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the resonance here of an earlier claim, that his book is a true record of events, \softline
recording only what had actually occurred, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.54-57.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The presence of the veil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 velo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) worn by Beatrice is insisted on fully three times (at vv. \softline
31 and 67 as well), and the canto has also begun with this word (verse 3).  (No other canto \softline
contains so many occurrences of the word.)  The climax of this scene with Beatrice will occur \softline
when she, bride-like, unveils herself at the end of the next canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.136-145).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 68.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The second (and now overt) reference to Minerva in association with Beatrice (see \softline
the note to vv. 31-33) probably, in conjunction with other references that are still more direct, \softline
associates her with Christ, or Sapience, the Word made flesh, the second person of the Trinity. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Verse 73 is problematic, as Singleton (comm. to verse 73) explains clearly: \softline
'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Guardaci}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Commentators differ in their interpretation of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ci}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here.  It could be the pronoun, in \softline
which case Beatrice, in her regal manner, would be using the plural of majesty, speaking as a \softline
monarch would, in the first person plural.  This reading is often accompanied by 'ben sem, ben \softline
sem' in the rest of the verse, continuing such a plural (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sem}{\plain \fs24 \f1  = }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 siamo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ci}{\plain \fs24 \f1  might be construed as \softline
the adverb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 qui}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , in which case the rest of the verse is usually given in the reading here adopted.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab   That Beatrice speaks the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ben}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (here meaning 'really,' but also carrying its root sense, \softline
'good' or 'well') three times in order to echo the triple iteration of 'Virgil' (vv. 49-51) and of 'weep' \softline
(vv. 56-57) was first noted by Tommaseo (comm. to these verses).  He does not go on to suggest \softline
that the first two sets of repeated words are tinged with loss, while this one is charged with \softline
triumph, but he might have.  For the contrastive self-namings of the Siren (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.19), 'Io son, \softline
io son dolce serena,' and of Beatrice, 'Ben son, ben son Beatrice' and of the way both may mirror \softline
or mimic the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tetragrammaton}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the ninth of Isidore of Seville's ten Hebrew names for God, \softline
transliterated by him as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ia, ia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etym}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.i.16), see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), p. 144n.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Beatrice's anger at wayward Dante, saved by mercies in Heaven that seem hardly to have \softline
been predictable, given his behavior, is not difficult to fathom.  But he has survived.  Now, face to \softline
face with the beatified woman who has interceded for him, he weeps for Virgil, compounding his \softline
failing past behavior by now missing his pagan guide instead of rejoicing in the presence of \softline
Beatrice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This fairly obvious reference to Ovid's Narcissus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.339-510) was \softline
perhaps first discussed by Kevin Brownlee ("Dante and Narcissus [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX, 76-99]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  96 [1978], pp. 201-6).  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.126-129 and that to vv. 85-99, \softline
below.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the commentators' failure to recognize the problematic nature of this tercet, \softline
see Hollander ("Dante's Use of the Fiftieth Psalm," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  91 [1973]), p. 149, n. 2.  As for \softline
the pointed reference to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pedes meos}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (my feet), among the few who have believed that there is a \softline
'solution' to Dante's riddle, there are two schools.  What does it mean to say the angels 'did not \softline
sing past '}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pedes meos}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ''?  Freccero ("Adam's Stand," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Romance Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1961], pp. 115-18) and \softline
P{\f2\u233\'e9}zard (ed., Dante Alighieri, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Oeuvres compl{\f3 \'50}tes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Paris: Gallimard, 1965]), p. 1335, both believe \softline
that the reference is limited to the end of the ninth verse ('You [God] have not given me over to \softline
my enemies, but have }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 set my feet in a spacious place}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ') of Psalm 30 (31:8), the words }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pedes meos}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
understood as reflecting Dante's newly gained freedom of the will to move about the garden as he \softline
chooses.  Mineo (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Profetismo e Apocalittica in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Catania: Universit{\f3 \'42} di Catania, Facolt{\f3 \'42} di  
Lettere e Filosofia, 1968]) and Hollander, partly because Dante's very way of expressing himself \softline
asks us to (if someone tells us he has not gone farther than nine we realize he is telling us that he \softline
did not reach ten), argue for the relevance of the next verse in Psalm 30, which is a citation of the \softline
opening verse of Psalm 50, 'Have mercy on me, O Lord,' the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miserere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of David's penitential song \softline
that serves as source for Dante's first spoken words in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.65).  In this \softline
understanding, the angels, intervening on Dante's behalf with stern Beatrice, deliberately stop \softline
short of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miserere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  out of sympathy for poor Dante, so heavily chastised by Beatrice.  (See the \softline
note to vv. 103-108, below.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a history of the exegesis examining Dante's tears, mainly given over to attack \softline
and counterattack over the issue of the contorted and artificial nature of the simile, see Francesco \softline
Mazzoni ("Un incontro di Dante con l'esegesi biblica [A proposito di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX, 85-99]," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la Bibbia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. G. Barblan [Florence: Olschki, 1988]), pp. 180-89.  Mazzoni goes on (pp. \softline
189-90) to bring three sources to bear: first two similes in Ovid: the melting of Ovid's Narcissus in \softline
his self-love (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.486-490, a passage discussed in this context in the nineteenth century by \softline
Luigi Venturi and Cesari, according to Trucchi [comm. to vv. 88-90]; and see Kevin Brownlee \softline
["Dante and Narcissus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX, 76-99)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  96 (1978), pp. 201-6] and R.A. \softline
Shoaf ["'Lo gel che m'era intorno al cor' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . 30.97) and 'Frigidus circum praecordia sanguis' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Geo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . 2.484): Dante's Transcendence of Virgil," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1  5 (1989), pp. 30-45], for discussion of the liquefaction of Biblis when her brother, Caunus, rejects her incestuous \softline
love [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.659-665, also previously noted by Trucchi (comm. to vv. 91-93)]).  Mazzoni's \softline
major interpretive novelty (pp. 207-212) lies in his seeing Dante's tears as reflecting the \softline
liquefaction in Psalm 147:16-18 as commented on by St. Augustine (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 In Ps. CLVIII Enarratio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Patrologia Latina, XXXVIII, col. 1931]): 'He gives snow like wool; he scatters the hoarfrost like \softline
ashes. / He casts forth his ice like morsels; who can stand before his cold? / He sends out his \softline
word, and melts [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 liquefacit}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ] them; he causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow.'  Augustine's \softline
gloss has it that a sinner, 'frozen' in his sinfulness, may yet 'liquefy' and be saved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrase 'living beams' is Dante's way of referring to trees as the eventual source of \softline
wooden beams that may be hewn from them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Shoaf ("'Lo gel che m'era intorno al cor' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . 30.97] and 'Frigidus circum \softline
praecordia sanguis' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Geo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . 2.484]: Dante's Transcendence of Virgil," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
5 [1989], pp. 30-45) examines Dante's Christianizing reinterpretation of the second }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgic}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as \softline
part of his revision of Virgilian values for the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , taking off from the line (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.484) \softline
'frigidus obstiterit circum praecordia sanguis' ([But if] the chill blood about my heart bar [me from \softline
reaching those realms of nature]) that he sees reflected in this verse of Dante's.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The point of Beatrice's gentle rebuke of the angels is that they, aware of Dante's \softline
past sins and of his eventual salvation, are now seeing him primarily as a saved soul rather than as \softline
a formerly sinful one, as Beatrice now (and vehemently) does.  In her view, they are celebrating \softline
his salvation prematurely because they are seeing it }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sub specie eternitatis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , beyond the time that \softline
still holds him bound.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab A paraphrase of the passage might run as follows: 'The words with which I shall respond \softline
to your pity for Dante are not addressed to you, who know all mortal contingency, past present 
and future, as a single present series of facts }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sub specie aeternitatis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , but to him, so that his \softline
contrition may be commensurate with his fault.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the resonance of Ovid's tale of Argus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.625-721), with his vision \softline
that seems limited, for all its seeing, when compared with the total sight of these angels, see \softline
Jessica Levenstein ("The Pilgrim, the Poet, and the Cowgirl: Dante's Alter-}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Io}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX-XXXI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  114 [1996]), pp. 194-95.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Pietrobono (comm. to vv. 109-111) points out that in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.xxi.7-8) \softline
Dante had already revealed his theory of the relationship among the elements of the individual \softline
human soul, the fathering sower, the embryo, and the astral influences of the constellations of the \softline
zodiac that shape its human talents.  In this passage we hear about God, who breathes in last the \softline
vital element, the intellectual, or rational, soul.  The passage at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.68-75 explains \softline
that the generation of the rational soul is performed directly by God; here we learn that not even \softline
the saved in the Empyrean nor the angels can understand the love that moves God in the creation \softline
of that soul in each of his human creatures.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It seems obvious to most readers today that the phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vita nova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  refers, if in its \softline
Latin form, to Dante's first prosimetrum, the thirty-one poems collected with prose commentary \softline
known as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The New Life}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  And it seemed so to at least one very early commentator, the Ottimo (in \softline
1333, in his general note to the canto).  However, here is the commentary of Benvenuto da Imola \softline
to this passage (comm. to vv. 109-117): 'This man, i.e., Dante, was such in his new life, i.e., in his \softline
boyhood; others, however, refer to his treatise }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vita nova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which he composed in his youth.  \softline
But it is surely ridiculous to do so, seeing that the author was ashamed of it in his maturity.'  \softline
Benvenuto's enthusiastic pre-humanist reading of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  will only accept an allegorical, \softline
theologized Beatrice who bears no resemblance to the mortal girl of the early work.  Thus does he \softline
fail to grasp the central pretext of the entire poem, and surely of this extended scene in the garden \softline
of Eden.  What seems most notable, perhaps, is the power of Benvenuto's opinion.  None of the \softline
other early commentators who follow him mentions the book as being referred to here.  It is only \softline
with Venturi (1732, comm. to verse 115) that we hear that it }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 may}{\plain \fs24 \f1  also be referred to; this over-cautious estimate will be found in several others, such as Portirelli (comm. to vv. 109-117), \softline
Mestica (comm. to verse 115), and Del Lungo (comm. to vv. 115-116).  It was, however, only \softline
Scartazzini -- as is so often the case -- who really tried to examine the issue frontally.  His solution \softline
(comm. to verse 115) was to argue that the literal sense of 'new life' was 'youth,' but that the \softline
phrase referred to the regeneration of Dante's virtue by agency of Beatrice.  One may feel it \softline
necessary to quibble with this estimate, since Dante first felt the power of Beatrice's goodness \softline
when he was just days from turning nine years old, and thus the traditional reading 'boyhood' \softline
(more disturbing to such as Scartazzini than 'youth') is correct.  Scartazzini, however, is \softline
uncompromising and probably convincing in sensing that the reference is to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 libello}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as well.  \softline
How could it be otherwise?  One can see in this dispute, which continues in muffled form even \softline
today, an outline of the way commentators influence the readings of other commentators, and \softline
thus eventually teachers, and finally students.  Benvenuto's opinions are respected (and surely they \softline
should be, as he is clearly one of the most acute students of the poem), but sometimes slavishly.  \softline
Similarly, Scartazzini's insistent judgments, frequently overstated and often too assured, are \softline
avoided by later commentators, for perhaps a series of reasons.  Scartazzini was not only a 
German Swiss and a Protestant, but a Protestant clergyman.  And perhaps most annoying of all to \softline
an Italian reader, he loved to belittle his adversaries and thought little or nothing of most of his \softline
Italian colleagues.  One result of this, as a certain amount of consultation of the Dartmouth Dante \softline
Project will affirm, is that Scartazzini's tendentious and flawed but nonetheless great commentary \softline
(1900), reflecting the entries that were composed for his one-man }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Enciclopedia dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(published in Milano in 1896 and 1899, and then reissued in 1905, edited by Fiammazzo), is both \softline
pillaged and avoided in silence by many of those who came after him.  For all his acerbity -- even \softline
nastiness -- his work deserves much more attention than it generally receives.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab One finds, even among recent commentators, a certain desire to avoid committing oneself \softline
to what seems completely obvious: the phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vita nova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  cannot help but call to mind, in this \softline
context, the work that records Beatrice's lasting impact on Dante, first in his 'new life' (when they \softline
were both children, a time to which Dante refers in verse 42: 'before I had outgrown my \softline
childhood') and then later on, as recorded in the book called 'The New Life.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Edward Moore's essay, "The Reproaches of Beatrice" (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Third \softline
Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1903)]), pp. 221-52, remains one of the \softline
most valuable attempts to deal with this convoluted expression of the single most important \softline
explanation Dante offers with regard to what he now conceives to have been his chief errors \softline
before he wrote the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For a similar view, one of ancient lineage, see Saverio Bellomo's \softline
edition (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Expositio seu comentum super "Comedia" Dantis Allegherii}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Lettere, \softline
1989]) of Filippo Villani's commentary to the first canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (ca. 1400 [now included in the \softline
Dartmouth Dante Project).  Filippo refers (p. 50) to a commentary of his to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX \softline
(unfortunately lost); he also refers to that canto, in other places, in such a way as to indicate he \softline
thought it was the key to an understanding of what we might call the 'autobiographical' aspect of \softline
the poem as it is essential to the eventual allegorical meaning Bellomo sees Villani as seeking (p. \softline
9).  The fact that Villani's first published work on Dante was devoted to Canto XXX gives us \softline
some idea of how important he thought this canto was, as does the mere fact that a commentary \softline
to the first canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is peppered with references to the thirtieth of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Ruggero Stefanini ("Canto XXX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy": Introductory Readings \softline
II: "Purgatorio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Tibor Wlassics [Charlottesville: Lectura Dantis, University of Virginia, \softline
1993]), p. 456, gives a crisp account of Dante's possible sexual wanderings that may be referred \softline
to in these verses: 'The conclusion is inescapable: the poet confesses that down there in Florence, \softline
during the gay nineties, he was seduced by the counterfeited beauty of the 'femmina balba' [the \softline
stammering woman in the dream of the Siren in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.7].  The stressed lexical references \softline
leave no room for doubt: false images of good, which pay no promise in full; pits and chains that \softline
block the path to the Highest Good; attractions or immediate advantages that attract and distract; \softline
the song of the Sirens ('I am -- she sang -- I am a sweet siren' -- XIX.19); longing for mortal and \softline
deceitful things that weigh down the wings of those who, instead, were created to fly upward \softline
(XII.95f.); the false pleasure of the present things, among which are to be included the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pargolette}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[young girls] and the frivolous loves they inspire.'  Like many modern students of the problem \softline
(e.g., Carroll [comm. to vv. 49-75], Joseph Mazzeo [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medieval Cultural Tradition in Dante's \softline
"Comedy"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1960)], pp. 205-12; Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969)], pp. 160-68; Bosco/Reggio [comms. \softline
(as numbered in the DDP version of their notes) to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.115-132; XXXI.31-36; XXXI.55-60; XXXIII.73-102; Picone ["La poesia romanza della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Salus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Bertran de Born nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita Nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," 
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Forum Italicum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  15 (1981)], pp. 42-43), Stefanini avoids the simplistic answer that would make \softline
Dante guilty either of sexual or of intellectual deviance from his Beatrice and sees that both forms \softline
of misbehavior are involved.  The precise nature of both sets of sins remains, one must admit, \softline
difficult to assess.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice offers an epitome of the main narrative of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , according to \softline
which for some sixteen years (1274-1290) she attempted to lead Dante to God, despite his natural \softline
sinful disposition.  Unfortunately, even while she lived, the 'rich soil' of his soul grew weeds.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Upon Beatrice's death, and according to Dante's own report in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (chapters XXXV-XXXIX), he did indeed give himself to at least one other (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 altrui}{\plain \fs24 \f1  can be either \softline
singular or plural in Dante).  His probably most egregious dalliance was with the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(noble lady) who sympathized with his distress.  The lady is later allegorized, in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
as the Lady Philosophy.  (For discussion, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.85-90.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the 'today fully discredited' notion that Dante revised the ending of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in \softline
light of his new understanding of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that he developed in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see the \softline
discussion, with bibliography, in Ruggero Stefanini ("Canto XXX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy": \softline
Introductory Readings II: "Purgatorio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Tibor Wlassics [Charlottesville: Lectura Dantis, \softline
University of Virginia, 1993]), p. 462 (n. 15), taking issue with Pietrobono, Nardi, and Branca \softline
and agreeing with Barbi and Marti.  See, for a similar view, Selene Sarteschi, "Osservazioni \softline
intorno alla presunta doppia redazione della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Via Nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in her }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Per la "Commedia" e non per \softline
essa soltanto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Rome: Bulzoni, 2002 [1996]), pp. 13-58.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 134.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sort of dream Beatrice prayed God to send Dante is probably well represented \softline
by the dream of the Siren in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.7-32.  That accounts for the first part of Beatrice's \softline
formulation, i.e., Dante was given negative dreams about his disastrous love for the wrong lady.  \softline
What about the second?  What God-sent 'inspirations' was she granted in order to call him back to \softline
loving her even after her death?  Scartazzini (comm. to vv. 133-134) offers a simple and \softline
compelling hypothesis (apparently silently acceded to by any number of later commentators, who \softline
make the same point without even a mention of his name).  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIX.1 Dante \softline
receives the image of the girlish Beatrice in his phantasy, the image-receiving part of his mind \softline
(one may compare the ecstatic visions vouchsafed him for the exemplary figures on the terrace of \softline
Wrath [and see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XV.85-114]).  As he recounts (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIX.2-6), this vision of \softline
Beatrice had the necessary effect, and he resolved to love her yet again, turning away his affection \softline
from the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  And then, Scartazzini continues, he was allowed the final vision of \softline
Beatrice seated in the Empyrean (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XLII.1).  Thus, as seems clear, while Dante slept, God sent \softline
him dreams of what was unworthy in his love for the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; while he was awake, positive \softline
images of Beatrice.  If this program is correctly perceived, it matches precisely the mode \softline
employed to teach penitents on the mountain, positive and negative examples teaching what to \softline
follow and what to flee.  Unfortunately, even after such encouragement, Dante would fall again.  \softline
See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.85-90.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Poor Virgil!  He has done the Christians sixty-four cantos' worth of service, \softline
guiding their great poet to his redemption and vision, and now the very lady who sought his help \softline
does not even mention his name; he is but 'colui' (the one who).  Where is Virgil now?  On his 
way back to Limbo, we must assume.  And thus, we may also assume, to another sad welcome \softline
from his fellow poets once he is again (less than a week after he had already returned once [see \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.80-81]) among them in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 etterno essilio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (eternal exile -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.18).  We \softline
shall only hear his name twice more (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par. }{\plain \fs24 \f1 XVII.19 and XXVI.118) and never again from \softline
Beatrice, who only uses it once, in her first words, coupling it with Dante's (verse 55), and then to \softline
shame Dante for his affection for Virgil when there are more important feelings to be had.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142-145.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As Beatrice wept in Virgil's presence in hell for Dante's sake (verse 141), so \softline
now it is Dante's turn to weep for the sins that made her intervention necessary.  The angels may \softline
want to celebrate the eventual triumph of this saved Christian; Beatrice is here to make sure that \softline
he observes the ritual of the completion of purgation correctly, even on this trial run.\par
}}