{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 23}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 perdere la vita}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as meaning simply 'to spend one's life,' and as not necessarily \softline
implying any negative moralizing judgment, see Adolfo Jenni ({\u8220\'93}Il Canto XXIII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. V [Florence: Le Monnier, 1972]), p. 1n.  The context here (Virgil's \softline
gentle chiding), however, would seem to support the more usual interpretation, one that sees the \softline
phrase as negative ('waste one's life').  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXI.61-63, the poet compares his earlier \softline
lustful self to a young bird being pursued by hunters.  Teodolinda Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984]), pp. 46-48, notes the way in which Forese's final \softline
words (vv. 91-93) reflect this concern with wasting time and also suggests a connection between \softline
the diminutive }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pargoletta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (young girl) in that later passage and the diminutive }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 uccellino}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here; in \softline
this way Dante would be associating the apparently innocent 'sport' of birding with his sexual \softline
disloyalty to Beatrice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrase that would make Virgil 'more than father' to Dante, according to the early \softline
commentators, praises his instruction of Dante in virtue, here redirecting his attention to the \softline
immediate task (and back from mere curiosity, in Carroll's view [comm. to vv. 1-6]).  It may also \softline
reflect the Roman poet's extraordinary ability to bring a pagan -- and perhaps even this backsliding \softline
Christian -- to Christ, as Statius's narrative has established (and see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.51, Dante's \softline
ultimate gesture of farewell to his 'father': 'Virgil, to whom I gave myself for my salvation').\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 5-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil has broken off his conversation with Statius in order to address Dante (with an \softline
Italian version of the Latin vocative case: 'figliuole,' verse 4).  As Singleton (comm. to verse 5) \softline
points out, all three of the similar warnings on the part of the protagonist's guide that the journey \softline
must be completed within a definite period occur in the 'next-to-last circle of each of the three \softline
realms' (see also }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.10-12; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.124 [the eighth of the nine heavenly spheres]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante does not find that having to resume his difficult task is unpleasant for a single \softline
reason: because the subject under discussion is poetry (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.127-129).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'O Lord, open my lips, and my mouth shall proclaim your praise.'  The song of the \softline
penitents in Gluttony derives from the defining moment of David's repentance, not for gluttonous \softline
behavior, but for lust (Psalm 50:17).  For the five other citations of this Psalm in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
see Hollander ("Dante's Use of the Fiftieth Psalm," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  91 [1973], pp. 145-50), who \softline
unaccountably did not include this clear reference.  For the admixture of delight and grief typical \softline
of expressions of penitence on this terrace, see George Andrew Trone ("The Cry of Dereliction in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  113 [1995], 111-29).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Beginning with Jacopo della Lana (comm. to vv. 10-11), commentators have noted that \softline
this verse of the Psalm corrects the former sins of those who were gluttons because of its \softline
insistence on this better use of mouths -- in songs of praise -- than on the pleasures of the table.  \softline
See the clear formulation of this idea in the presentation of Mary as exemplar of Temperance in \softline
the previous canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.142-144).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's question and Virgil's tentative answer are necessitated by the fact that, as \softline
the following simile will make plain, the penitents here are currently }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 behind}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the travelers.  On the 
previous terrace they had become accustomed to looking upon stationary souls, prostrate on the \softline
ground before them.  Here, as on the terraces of Pride, Wrath, and Sloth (and Lust, still ahead of \softline
them), the penitents are in motion.  (Only in Envy and Avarice are they not.)  For another \softline
understanding of the purport of these verses, see Lloyd Howard, "Virgil the Blind Guide in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV-XVI and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII-XXIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 (2003), pp. 407-19, who argues that this passage (vv. 10-15), set into opposition with }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI.19-24, \softline
shows Virgil as a hesitant guide where he had, seven cantos before, been a self-confident one; \softline
Howard concludes that in Virgil, overwhelmed and chagrined by his own failure (at least \softline
compared with the success he has generated in Statius, this other Roman poet, saved by reading \softline
his texts), we see that 'the limitations of Virgil's competence to guide is again under scrutiny, and \softline
he becomes more tentative, losing the assurance that he had in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV and XVI' (p. 413).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The simile marks these penitents as 'serious,' earnestly seeking their ritual \softline
repentance to seal their salvation.  We are perhaps reminded that the last two cantos, with their \softline
celebration of the completed purging of a single penitent, were absolutely unusual; now it is back \softline
to business as usual.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab At least since the time of Poletto (comm. to these verses) commentators have thought of \softline
Dante's earlier treatment of pilgrims lost in thought, described in the penultimate sonnet of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita \softline
nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (XL.9).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The brief description of the gaunt visages of these penitents establishes the precise \softline
nature of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 contrapasso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here: starvation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first reference is to Ovid's narrative concerning Erysichthon, who, having cut \softline
down trees in a sacred grove, was driven by its offended deity, Ceres, into boundless appetite that \softline
only ended when he engorged his own flesh (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.738-878).  The second, as was noted \softline
by several of the early commentators, is to an incident recorded in the sixth book of Josephus's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De \softline
bello judaico}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concerning the Jewish War}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in which a young woman named Mary, during the \softline
general starvation brought about by Titus's siege of Jerusalem in A.D. 70, killed, cooked, and ate \softline
her infant son.  Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 28-30) contrasts the actions of this cruel Mary with \softline
those of that other Mary, who watched as her son, Jesus, was crucified.  For an English \softline
translation of the episode in Josephus's account see Longfellow, comm. to verse 30).  It is \softline
noteworthy that the poet explicitly adds exemplars to those 'found' on the seven terraces.  It is \softline
further noteworthy that he underlines the uniqueness of the gesture by having the first of the two \softline
added in his voice as poet, while the second is reported as his association at the time, back there \softline
upon the mountain.  The protagonist thinks of Mary's fellow Hebrews (and not of her, since she \softline
had eaten) as being identically stricken as are these penitents, while the poet thinks of the starved \softline
aspect of Ovid's self-ingester.  While Mary's fellow citizens are not necessarily guilty of anything, \softline
they may (or may not) be meant to be associated with her horrific act of impiety; Erysichthon, on \softline
the other hand, has his consuming hunger thrust upon him because of an impious act.  Both \softline
references are, however, to 'tragedies,' whether of the Jews who lost their holy city or of \softline
Erysichthon, who lost his life.  These penitents, however, are on the verge of entering the New \softline
Jerusalem.  Thus Dante's associations move back to their sinful days on earth, leaving only latent \softline
their better endings.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For an interpretation of Ovid's tale as a parable, suggesting that the body should be read as 
indicating the condition of the soul, see William Stephany ("Erysichthon and the Poetics of the \softline
Spirit," in Rachel Jacoff and Jeffrey T. Schnapp, eds., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Poetry of Allusion: Virgil and Ovid in \softline
Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1991], pp. 173-80), who begins by \softline
pointing out that Dante's penitents resemble not Erysichthon so much as the personified figure of \softline
hunger (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Fames}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in Ovid's story.  Stephany is perhaps the only scholar who has treated the passage \softline
to deal with the change in Dantean point of view noted above; in his understanding, the poet's and \softline
the protagonist's associations are potentially at odds.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 32-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In the faces of the penitents, hollow-eyed, pale, skeletal, an observer might read \softline
only the 'm,' formed by the combination of cheekbones, eyebrows, and nose, but not the 'o's of the \softline
eyes, shrunken from view.  Longfellow (comm. to verse 32), Scartazzini (comm. to verse 32), and \softline
others present a passage from one Berthold, a Franciscan of Regensburg (Germany), which \softline
describes the 'letters' found in human faces, first the 'omo' (Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 homo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) that is man's name and \softline
then the 'dei' (Latin genitive of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 deus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 'of God'); our faces announce that each of us is a 'man of \softline
God.'  For the text of his remarks in English, see the commentary of Longfellow or of Singleton \softline
to this passage.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the fruit of the tree and the water flowing over its leaves that cause such \softline
appetite, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.137-138; and see the later reference in this canto (vv. 62-63).  That \softline
this desire is good but not yet realizable would seem again to point to the notion that this tree is \softline
descended from the Tree of Life.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.130-135.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'scaling skin' of these penitents, a sign of their advanced 'starvation,' will again be \softline
insisted on at vv. 49 and 58.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 42-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The penitent's quick and gentle recognition of Dante, whose visage is in its normal \softline
human condition, plays off the gradual recognition on the part of the protagonist of his \softline
interlocutor.  This is his old friend, Forese Donati.  He was the brother of two other personages \softline
referred to in his remarks, Piccarda (encountered by Dante in the heaven of the Moon in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III), \softline
praised generously (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.13-15), and Corso, denounced savagely (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.82-87).  \softline
The interplay between these fellow Florentines develops as one of the most tender scenes in the \softline
entire poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is perhaps worth noting that the words that Forese and the others have been singing \softline
(verse 11) happen to come from the very fiftieth Psalm that opens with what serves as the \softline
protagonist's first spoken word in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy, Miserere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.65).  The stories of Forese and of \softline
Dante are certainly meant to show God's great mercy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Forese's understandable desire to learn how his old friend is involved in such an \softline
extraordinary experience, and by what special souls he is accompanied, makes him sound like \softline
anyone surprised by the enormous success of an old friend of apparently ordinary abilities and of \softline
no apparent particular distinction.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante, turning the tables, is much more interested in finding out about Forese, \softline
given his dreadful disfigurment, than in responding to his old friend's question.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-71.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Forese begins by glossing for us the meaning of the tree and water encountered on \softline
the previous terrace.  Both of these are informed by divine power with the promise of eternal life -- object of the true hunger of these penitents.  As the expiation of their former gluttony leads to \softline
this better hunger, they have their pangs renewed at another tree as well.  Many commentators \softline
have believed that the text here invites us to believe that there is a multitude of trees stationed \softline
along the rest of the terrace, an idea that probably must be discarded because we will in fact find \softline
only one more (in the next canto).  Since the two that we do discover in the text are so \softline
dramatically emblematic of the two trees of Genesis, and since no other tree along this terrace is \softline
alluded to, it is almost certainly wise to reject that theory, as D'Ovidio ("Esposizione del canto \softline
XX dell'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuovo volume di studi danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Caserta-Rome: A. P. E., 1926]), p. \softline
206, insisted.  Manfredi Porena (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.116-117) floats a curious hypothesis.  \softline
Since these two trees are relatively close together, it seems reasonable to him that Dante would \softline
have wanted lots more trees along the ledge.  If so, and if these two are shoots from the two \softline
Edenic trees, why should we not believe that there are many other shoots of them on this terrace, \softline
each repeating the same exemplars that we hear from these two?  One might object, for instance, \softline
that then we should imagine a plurality of devils carving up the schismatics in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII; it \softline
would have been niggardly of Dante to supply us (as he does at vv. 37-42) only with one.  \softline
Porena, however, eventually throws in his hand and declares that both these shoots come from the \softline
Tree of Knowledge, a view that is probably even more dubious than his attempt to multiply the \softline
two trees that are described as being here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 72-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The text used by most of the early commentators apparently offered a form of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 albore}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 'tree' in the singular.  Petrocchi's note, however, shows a preponderance of plural forms \softline
and all modern editors agree.  We have seen the offshoot of the Tree of Life (and if the early \softline
commentators should happen to be correct in believing that the reference here is to a single tree, it \softline
would be to that one [see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.130-135]).  In the next canto (vv. 113-117) we \softline
shall come upon a second, clearly descended from the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil.  \softline
The most direct explanation of vv. 73-74, 'the same desire leads us to the trees / that led Christ to \softline
utter }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 El{\f3 \'58}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  with such bliss,' is that the first sin of Adam and Eve, eating of the fruit of that tree, \softline
deprived them of the fruit of the other, eternal life.  Thus Christ's sacrifice is doubly restorative, \softline
redeeming the sin and restoring the reward.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab See Matthew 27:46 for 'Eli, Eli, lamma sabacthani?' (My God, My God, why have you \softline
forsaken me?), Christ's last words on the cross, uttered in Aramaic.  (See also Mark 15:34, with \softline
the variant 'Eloi.')  Many of the early commentators discuss the passage in the light of Jesus's \softline
request that the 'cup' (of crucifixion) pass from him, but then accepting it joyfully in favor of the \softline
resultant redemption of humankind.  The human in Him momentarily despairs, but then the God in \softline
Him rejoices.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the notion that the penitents, like Jesus on the cross, simultaneously wish and do not \softline
wish to suffer in order to achieve redemption, see George Andrew Trone ("The Cry of Dereliction \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  113 [1995], 111-29).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The entire context of this intimate recollection invites us to believe that Forese (to \softline
leave to one side the question of Dante's own behavior), in his life on earth, had behaved in ways \softline
that suggested to his friend that his salvation was not exactly to be expected.  Dante's question is \softline
amusing.  Since Forese, dead for less than four years (he died in July of 1296), had lived most of 
his life a sinner (and thus was late in his repentance), why did Dante not find him down on the \softline
lower slopes of the mountain in ante-purgatory?  (This is possibly a sort of compromise, a far \softline
more polite question than 'Why did I not find you in hell?')\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The prayerful tears of Forese's wife, Nella, demonstrate emphatically that the \softline
efficacy of prayer is not limited to the benefit of the souls found in ante-purgatory, but extends to \softline
those involved in active purgation as well.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In a famous exchange of sonnets in a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a sort of poetic contest in the form of a \softline
series of exchanged insults, Dante and Forese heaped calumnies upon one another for sexual and \softline
other inadequacies.  While there is continuing dispute concerning the authenticity of these poems \softline
(see the note to vv. 115-117), in which, among other things, poor Nella is presented as being cold \softline
at night because of the lack of sexual interest on the part of her impotent husband, this exchange \softline
between the two men would seem to be based on some personal reminiscence of a similar nature.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Nella continues Dante's 'legends of good women' here in purgatory, tales of women who \softline
lived thoroughly virtuous lives.  Such as these begin with Pia de' Tolomei (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.130-136), \softline
continue with Alagia (if one reads her character positively) in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.142-145, include in \softline
the briefest of mention virtuous pagan women (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.109-114, adding eight more to the \softline
earlier eight found in Limbo), possibly include the enigmatic reference to 'Gentucca' in the next \softline
canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.37), and conclude with Piccarda, Costanza, and St. Clare in the third canto of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  None of the other three prominent women who are seen in these realms of salvation, \softline
Sapia (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII) and then both Cunizza and Rahab (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX), quite fill the bill, since at least \softline
portions of their lives on earth were spectacularly sinful.  As for Lucy (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX), Matelda (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVIII), Beatrice, the Hebrew matriarchs seen seated in the heavenly Rose (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII), and \softline
the Virgin Mary, they are all creatures of a still higher order of saintly virtue.  For discussions of \softline
the women of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Joan Ferrante (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Woman as Image in Medieval Literature from \softline
the Twelfth Century to Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [New York: Columbia University Press, 1975]); Rachel Jacoff \softline
("Transgression and Transcendence: Figures of Female Desire in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Romanic \softline
Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  79 [1988], pp. 129-42); and Victoria Kirkham ("A Canon of Women in Dante's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annali d'Italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  7 [1989], pp. 16-41).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Forese compares the sexually provocative women of Florence with the women of \softline
a wild region of Sardinia, renowned (according to some of the early commentators) for their \softline
crude behavior and indecent dress.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 98-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the sumptuary laws (laws governing attire) reflected in Forese's prediction \softline
and which were contained in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Constitutions of Florence}{\plain \fs24 \f1  drawn up by the new Bishop of the \softline
city, Antonio d'Orso Biliotti, in 1310, see Anthony Cassell ("'Mostrando con le poppe il petto' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII, 102)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  96 [1978]), p. 79.  Cassell argues that the exiled Dante, \softline
writing only a few years later, nevertheless had ample time to have gotten word of these.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-119.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   What activities do Dante's words indicate?  The first commentators believed \softline
that he refers to, in the phrase of Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 115-117), their mutual pursuit of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 delectabilia non honesta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (improper pleasures).  No commentator before the Anonimo Fiorentino \softline
had apparently read or heard of their }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (one of the main reasons that those who deny its \softline
authenticity do so).  And it was only in the late nineteenth century that some offered the opinion 
that this passage referred to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Nearly all of the more recent discussants are firmly of \softline
the opinion, agreeing with the first commentators, that Dante is referring to the actual relationship \softline
he had with Forese and the sort of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 delectabilia non honesta}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that they shared in their \softline
companionship.  It is not clear exactly what activities the poet has in mind, but it is clear that his \softline
own are seen as afflicting him when Virgil rescued him from sin and led him into the afterworld.  \softline
This is the first time we have any indication that Dante's sins on earth might be characterized as \softline
having involved moral turpitude.  (John of Serravalle [comm. to vv. 115-117] is close to being \softline
specific in a scabrous understanding: 'They were comrades in various lascivious behaviors, which \softline
they engaged in mutually and together.'  Naturally, the apparent reference to homosexuality has \softline
not received later attention.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab There has been a continuing effort to deny the authenticity of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This began \softline
with Domenico Guerri's debate with Michele Barbi in the early 1930s, which Guerri's student, \softline
Antonio Lanza, reopened in the early 1970s.  His opposition to authenticity is currently supported \softline
by }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  student, Mauro Cursietti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La falsa Tenzone di Dante con Forese Donati}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Anzio: De \softline
Rubeis, 1995]).  (Their position is supported by Ruggero Stefanini ["'Tenzone' s{\f3 \'58} e 'tenzone' no," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1  18-19 (1996), pp. 111-24].)  For a recent overview of the current \softline
debate, with necessary bibliography and polemical insistence on inauthenticity, see Lanza ("A \softline
norma di filologia: ancora a proposito della cosiddetta 'Tenzone tra Dante e Forese,'"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
10 [1997], pp. 43-54); see also Cursietti ("Nuovi contributi per l'apocrifia della cosiddeta \softline
'Tenzone di Dante con Forese Donati': ovvero la 'Tenzone del Pan{\f3 \'58}co,'" in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Bibliologia e critica \softline
dantesca: saggi dedicati a Enzo Esposito}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. V. De Gregorio, vol. II: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Saggi danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: \softline
Longo, 1997], pp. 53-72).  But see Fabian Alfie's arguments ("For Want of a Nail: The Guerri-Lanza-Cursietti Argument regarding the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  116 [1998], pp. 141-59) for \softline
retention of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the Dantean canon on the basis of the evidence of the manuscripts.  \softline
The debate is probably far from over.  For studies of the reflection of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Fredi Chiappelli ("Proposta d'interpretazione per la tenzone di Dante con Forese \softline
Donati," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  142 [1965], pp. 321-50); Piero Cudini ("La \softline
tenzone tra Dante e Forese e la }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX;}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII-XXIV]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico \softline
della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  159 [1982], pp. 1-25); and Teodolinda Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984]), pp. 46-57.  For more recent studies that, \softline
countering Cursietti's interventions, continue to maintain the authenticity of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see \softline
Bernhard K{\f2\u246\'f6}nig ("Formen und Funktionen grober Komik bei Dante [zu}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI-XXIII]," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Deutsches Dante-Jahrbuch}{\plain \fs24 \f1  70 [1995], pp. 7-27) and Antonio St{\f2\u228\'e4}uble ("La tenzone di Dante con \softline
Forese Donati," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Le "Rime" di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. M. Picone [= }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  24 (1995)], pp. 151-70).  Also defending authenticity is De Robertis ("Ancora per Dante e Forese," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Feconde venner \softline
le carte.  Studi in onore di Ottavio Besomi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bellinzona: Casagrande, 1997], vol. I, pp. 35-48); but \softline
see the response by Lanza in his review in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Rassegna della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  8 (1997), pp. \softline
208-11.   For a collection of essays regarding the medieval }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see Pedrone and St{\f2\u228\'e4}uble, \softline
editors, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il genere "tenzone" nelle letterature romanze delle origini}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Ravenna: Longo, 1999).  \softline
Giovanni Borriero ("Considerazioni sulla tradizione manoscritta della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Dante con \softline
Forese," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Antico / Moderno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 [1999], pp. 385-405), has, like De Robertis, attempted to restore the \softline
garment of legitimacy to these poems; he is answered by Cursietti ("Dante e Forese alla taverna \softline
del Pan{\f3 \'58}co: le prove documentarie della falsit{\f3 \'42} della tenzone,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  16 [2000], pp. 7-22), \softline
offering evidence that makes the central negative arguments difficult to counter.  But now see \softline
Alfie again ("Rustico's Reputation: Ramifications for Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  with Forese Donati," 
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Electronic Bulletin of the Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [March 2002]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the similarity of the biting poems attributed to Forese to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 poesia burlesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  found in \softline
Meo dei Tolomei, Aimeric de Peguilhan, Uc de Saint-Cir, Cecco Angiolieri, and others, see \softline
Franco Suitner (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La poesia satirica e giocosa nell'et{\f3 \'42} dei comuni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Padova: Editrice Antenore, \softline
1983]), pp. 76-78.  There remains the possibility that there is a citation of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tenzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Decameron}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which, if it were accepted as such, would indicate that no one less than Giovanni \softline
Boccaccio had seen the text of one at least of these playful poems by 1351, thus greatly increasing \softline
the likelihood that they were exchanged by Dante and Forese and confirming, at any rate, that \softline
they were written well before the advent of the fifteenth century.  See Vittore Branca's note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Decameron}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.10.4, where the wife of Mazzeo della Montagna is cold because she is not \softline
'blanketed' by her husband, phrasing that Branca believes is derived expressly from the identical \softline
word (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 infreddata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) and concepts in Dante's poem about the similarly unloved wife of Forese.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 120-121.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX.127-129 for the moon being full in the opening scene of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  While there is debate (debate so diffuse and disheveled that one finds Singleton [comm. \softline
to vv. 119-120] translating the word as 'you' and in his commentary saying it means 'there') as to \softline
whether the particle }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (which may mean 'there' or 'you') here refers to the dark wood of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I \softline
or to the penitents on this mountain, our translation follows Daniello (comm. to vv. 119-120) in \softline
accepting the first possibility.  We are reminded that the action of the poem began on a Friday and \softline
that it is now Tuesday afternoon, the fifth day of the journey.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 122-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   With regard to the phrases }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 veri morti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vera carne}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Antonino Pagliaro \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ulisse}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ricerche semantiche sulla "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Messina-Florence: D'Anna, 1967]), p. \softline
654n., points out that on occasion, as here, Dante uses the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vero}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as indicating that 'behind \softline
an apparent reality lies an absolute reality,' in this case because the dead in hell are }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 really}{\plain \fs24 \f1  dead for \softline
having lost God, while Dante's flesh is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 really}{\plain \fs24 \f1  flesh (while the 'flesh' of the penitents is only \softline
apparent).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrasing here is reminiscent of that describing both Dante's errant soul (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XVIII.43) and its love for the 'stammering woman' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.8 and 13), language depending on \softline
the notion of making what is straight crooked, or the obverse.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 128-133.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Forese is the only penitent to whom Dante names Beatrice, thus perhaps \softline
indicating that he was aware, in the period of their shared improper behavior, that Dante was not \softline
being loyal to her.  Similarly, Forese is, once again uniquely among all penitents (Statius has just \softline
gone beyond that state when Dante names Virgil for him [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.125]), allowed to hear the \softline
name of Virgil from Dante's lips.  That Dante does not here refer to Statius by name might seem \softline
to indicate (at least hypothetically) that, while the two men spoke of Virgil in their earthly \softline
conversations, they had not discussed Statius.\par
}}