{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 29}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Echoing Guido Cavalcanti (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.43-48), the poet begins \softline
this canto by returning to the situation that we found early in the last one: Dante thinking that a \softline
beautiful young woman was in love with him.  Now the poet himself seems to confirm this.  We, \softline
nonetheless, probably realize that the song Matelda sings is once again utterly different from the \softline
sexually charged }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastorella}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and is indeed once again a Psalm 31:1 (32:1): 'Blessed are they whose \softline
transgressions are forgiven, whose sins are covered.'  As Singleton (comm. to verse 3) points out, \softline
St. Paul (Romans 4:3-8) interprets this Psalm as indicating God's reward for just humans.  \softline
However, this is not, in short, to 'fuse' the 'theme of profane love' with that of 'charity, love of a \softline
higher order' (comm. to verse 1), but simultaneously to include and supersede it.  Matelda is a \softline
very different sort of 'shepherd girl' from the one we found in Cavalcanti; that seems to be Dante's \softline
main point.  She does indeed love the protagonist, but she is not in love with him, as he at first \softline
believed.  The word that describes her affective state, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 innamorata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (touched by love), here appears \softline
for the first time in the poem.  It seems to collocate itself in the Cavalcantian world of sexual love.  \softline
However, as a graduate student at Princeton, Sheila Colwell, pointed out in the spring of 1984, \softline
the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 innamorare}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , in an inflected form or as a past participle, will be used eight more times in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , always to indicate, as we may realize either now or retrospectively, heavenly affection.  \softline
(See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.143, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIV.127, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX.64, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.70, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.44, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.88, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXI.5, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.105).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Why are these two groups of nymphs made part of the simile, when Dante and \softline
Matelda are moving near one another and in the same direction?  Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 4-9) \softline
glosses the tercet simply.  In the old days some nymphs wanted to leave the shade for the sun, \softline
while others desired to leave the sun for the shade.  Beginning with Tommaseo (comm. to these \softline
verses) some commentators have suggested a relationship with Virgil's two bands of nymphs \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.383), one hundred guarding the woods, another one hundred guarding the streams \softline
('centum quae silvas, centum quae flumina servant').  Neither the gloss nor the citation, however, \softline
answers the question, above, that has bothered many commentators, none more than Porena \softline
(comm. to vv. 4-7), who posits a lost classical source to explain our puzzlement but has not \softline
convinced others of this hypothesis.  It would seem that Dante wishes to express only the thought \softline
that, just as in the distant (classical) past nymphs would move purposefully from one place to \softline
another in the forest, so did he and Matelda move from where they had been standing to go \softline
somewhere else.  However, the brightness that they shall soon find would seem intrinsically to \softline
associate them with those nymphs who move from shade to sunshine.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Since the stream normally flows east to west but now makes a 90}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  veer to the north, \softline
Matelda, followed by Dante, heads south for fifty paces until it makes a second 90}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  bend, and they \softline
are once again heading due east.  Why the poet wanted to have this bend in the river, which \softline
accomplishes the removal of Dante and Matelda to a point some fifty feet south of where they had \softline
been and from which they resume movement in an easterly direction, has not been clear to the \softline
commentators.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Matelda's addressing Dante as 'frate' (brother) reminds him (and the reader) of his \softline
earlier misunderstanding of the nature of her affection for him (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.43-45).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The lustrous presence is so bright that the protagonist, forgetting his recent and \softline
abundant instruction by Matelda on the absence of 'real' weather here (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.85-126), at \softline
first takes this shining for lightning, until its duration makes it clear that it is something altogether \softline
other.  In this way the poet builds suspense for the pageant yet to come.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is probably not without purpose that, near the beginning of each of these cantos \softline
(XXVIII and XXIX), in which his will is finally integral and good (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.140 and the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.139-141), the poet reveals that the protagonist's problems now center in his \softline
weak understanding.  Thus this second part of the poem anchors itself in the program of the \softline
correction of his intellect, which will last until }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist hears a melody (we will be allowed to know its lyric component \softline
at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.51) so beautiful that righteous indignation causes him to condemn Eve for \softline
depriving him of immortal life in this beautiful garden.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The veil that she would not accept is variously glossed, from the first commentators \softline
onward, either as being negative (ignorance) or positive (obedience), and some (e.g., Grabher \softline
[comm. to vv. 19-30]) have believed that it has both valences.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 primizie}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (first fruits) are the first fruits of God's eternal love as these are \softline
found here in Eden, 'this foretaste of eternal bliss,' promising the joys of eternity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This second reference to the growing intensity of this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 son et lumi{\f3 \'50}re}{\plain \fs24 \f1  again whets the \softline
reader's appetite to know what lies just ahead (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.21).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the fourth of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 's nine invocations (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.7-9).  \softline
The first to identify the nine invocations of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  correctly was apparently Fabio Fabbri \softline
("Le invocazioni nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale dantesco}{\plain \fs24 \f1  18 [1910], pp. 186-92).  See also \softline
Hollander ("The Invocations of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Yearbook of Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1976], pp. 235-40).  Singleton (comm. to these verses) is in error (but has much company in this) in referring \softline
only to the first six of these.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Fallani (comm. to vv. 37-38) rightly explains that 'the marvelous vision is entirely \softline
contained in the poet's memory' and that Dante now requires aid only in finding the correct words \softline
to express it.  (See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.10-12 in response to a similar second invocation in the \softline
first }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .)  In other words, he now requires aid from holy Muses to express in poetry the \softline
deeper truth of what he has seen in the pageant representing the Church Triumphant.  For the \softline
increasing importance of the notion of a prior 'conception' of God's truth to Dante's evolving self-presentation as poet, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.1-9 and Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: A Life in Works}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001]), p. 59.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Two authors stand behind this passage, as has been variously understood in the \softline
commentary tradition.  The first is St. Paul (II Cor. 11:27): 'in labor and hardships, in many a \softline
vigil, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.'  Paul tells us of his trials and \softline
tribulations that prepared him for his visionary rapture, when he was taken up into the third \softline
heaven (II Cor. 12:2).  The first commentator to make this connection, which now seems fairly \softline
obvious, was apparently Torraca (comm. to vv. 37-39).  See also Grandgent (comm. to verse 38), \softline
Sapegno (comm. to verse 38), Fallani (comm. to vv. 37-38), and Singleton (comm. to vv. 37-38).  \softline
The context fits: we are about to witness a Pauline vision (one which happens, however, to be 
more Johannine in nature, as we shall see).  However, there is another source, a much less \softline
apparently appropriate one, given the religious context of the entire scene: Virgil's invocation in \softline
his seventh book (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.641): 'now, goddesses, cast Helicon forth and move your song.'  \softline
'Helicon, celebrated range of mountains in Boeotia, sacred to Apollo and the Muses, in which rose \softline
the famous fountains of the Muses, Aganippe and Hippocrene.  Dante (perhaps through a \softline
misunderstanding of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.641; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.163) speaks of Helicon itself as a fountain' (Toynbee \softline
"Elicona" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  (He may, on the other hand, be indicating all the sources \softline
of poetic expression by their common site.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This invocation in Virgil's poem marks the transition to the 'Iliadic' military second half of \softline
the epic.  That might not seem particularly promising as a parallel here.  On the other hand, just as \softline
Virgil, some 600 lines into the second half of his martial epic places another invocation, so does \softline
Dante, some 185 lines into the second half of his theological epic, insert one of his.  For the first \softline
notice of the Virgilian reference see Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 40-42).  See also Scartazzini \softline
(comm. to verse 40), Poletto (comm. to these verses), Grandgent (comm. to verse 40), \softline
Casini/Barbi (comm. to verse 40), and almost all the recent commentators starting with Sapegno \softline
(comm. to verse 40).  For the meaning of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 merce}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (translated as 'reward'), we follow the \softline
reasoning of Bosco/Reggio (comm. to verse 39), who argue that the more common understanding \softline
('aid' or 'help') is countered by the rhetoric of the tercet, in which Dante presents himself as having \softline
suffered for the Muses and as now claiming what is due him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As for Urania, here the highest of the Muses and their leader (where Calliope, muse of \softline
epic, had held that role in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.9-12), as the muse of astronomy, of 'high things,' she is needed \softline
to give the poet fit words to convey the conceptual truth of the pageant to come.  Dante has seen \softline
it, but now, coming to write of it, he requires an understanding of its theological meaning in order \softline
to give it proper expression.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The thoughts behind the verses are 'hard' because of their exalted and difficult subject \softline
-- allegories of the Bible -- according to Marina De Fazio ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX," in  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's \softline
"Divine Comedy," Introductory Readings II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
(virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1993]), p. 435.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Like Matelda, who also seemed other than what she finally comes to mean to the \softline
protagonist, the seven candlesticks (verse 50) are perceived first and erroneously by him as seven \softline
trees.  Carroll (in his lengthy comm. to vv. 64-150) comments upon them as follows: 'They \softline
represent the seven "gifts of the Spirit," as named in the Vulgate of Isaiah 11:2-3, namely, \softline
Wisdom, Intellect, Counsel, Fortitude, Knowledge, Piety, and Fear of the Lord.'  Dante discusses \softline
them in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.xxi.11-12.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 47-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'common object' is a technical term derived from Scholastic discussions of \softline
sense perception.  Strictly speaking, it refers to things that can be perceived simultaneously by \softline
more than one of the five senses (e.g., taste and touch and perhaps smell for something in one's \softline
mouth; or sight, smell, and hearing [an animal in a field]) and are thus more likely to be \softline
misperceived.  For instance, one might have a pebble in one's mouth and smell a clove and think \softline
the pebble is a candy; or one might be looking at a horse in the distance in a cow pasture and \softline
smell manure, thus taking horse for cow.  Dante discusses the term as the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sensibile comune}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (that \softline
which is perceivable by several senses) in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.ix.6.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab Dante here has two senses in play, sight and hearing.  He was thus at first unable to make \softline
out what is being uttered (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.36) nor what is present at the uttering.  By now he \softline
realizes that the 'trees' are candlesticks and the song 'Hosanna.'  Dante is, strictly speaking, \softline
'cheating,' in that it is not the combination of confused senses that caused his problem, but merely \softline
distance, in each case.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Osanna}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , an untranslatable expression of joyous praise, is Dante's most frequent \softline
Hebraism in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.11).  It derives from the salute to Jesus offered \softline
as he enters Jerusalem (Matthew 21:19 ['Hosanna in altissimis']; Mark 11:10 ['Hosanna in \softline
excelsis']).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The candlesticks, now seen as a single shape, are all flaming at their tips, brighter \softline
than the full moon at its apex in the sky on a clear night.  This image, and many that are to follow, \softline
reflect passages in the Book of Revelation (here Apoc. 4:5), the seven lamps burning before the \softline
great throne of Judgment, 'which are the seven spirits of God,' as was first noted by Pietro di \softline
Dante (comm. to verse 50).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a useful discussion of the meaning of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stupore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (amazement) see Marina De \softline
Fazio ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX," in  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy," Introductory Readings II: \softline
"Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, Charlottesville: \softline
University of Virginia, 1993]), pp. 436-45.  She considers this passage alongside its precursor, \softline
with which it has evident similarities (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.139-148), in which Statius and Virgil smile at \softline
the revelation that this place, the earthly paradise, was what they understood as Parnassus.  Now \softline
Dante seeks only to see the reaction of Virgil to the pageant of Revelation and finds that his guide \softline
is amazed as are those who cannot understand, for all their wonder and reverence, what they are \softline
gazing at.  Thus, for her, Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ammirazione}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stupore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  have different valences.  For \softline
this to be Virgil's final observed behavior in the poem shows Dante's desire to control his \softline
admiration for his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 auctor}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Botterill ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII," in  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy," \softline
Introductory Readings II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, \softline
supplement, Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1993]), p. 405, on the other hand, argues that \softline
in these verses, for the first and only time in the poem, Dante and Virgil are 'on a footing of \softline
absolute equality.'  On }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stupore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as the sign of Virgil's incomprehension, see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il Virgilio \softline
dantesco: tragedia nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1983]), p. 133n.  See Dante's own \softline
gloss on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stupore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.xxv.5), where it is read as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stordimento}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (stupefaction, bewilderment).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reference to the modest gait of newly wedded brides as they leave the church to \softline
go to their husband's house introduces the theme of the wedding ceremony to the procession and \softline
to the poem, where it will reappear in a number of guises, including parody, throughout the rest of \softline
the scenes in the earthly paradise.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Matelda calls Dante's and our attention to what will be, at that moment, the \softline
theological high point in the poem, the pageant of the Church Triumphant.  For useful studies of \softline
the entirety of the scene that follows, see Edward Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Third Series: \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1903)]), pp. 178-220, "The Apocalyptic \softline
Vision"; Sergio Cristaldi ("Dalle beatitudini all'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Apocaliss}{\plain \fs24 \f1 e: Il Nuovo Testamento nella \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  17 [1988], pp. 23-67); Lino Pertile (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La puttana e il gigante: Dal 
Cantico dei Cantici al Paradiso Terrestre di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1998]), pp. 23-42 (for the \softline
particular relevance of the Song of Songs).  For the artistic sources of this procession, particularly \softline
those found in mosaics in and near Ravenna, see Bosco/Reggio (introductory note to this canto).  \softline
For the iconography and meaning of the symbolic elements in it, see Joan Isobel Friedman ("La \softline
processione mistica di Dante: allegoria e iconografia nel canto XXIX del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,"  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e \softline
le forme dell'allegoresi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. M. Picone [Ravenna: Longo, 1987], pp. 125-48).  And see Lansing \softline
("Narrative Design in Dante's Earthly Paradise," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  112 [1994], pp. 101-13) for the \softline
way in which Dante has designed the earthly paradise as an 'eighth terrace.'  For the notion that \softline
the arrival of the pageant marks a change from the 'horizontal' nature of the Old Testament model \softline
for the poem in the Exodus to a New Testament's 'vertical' expression present in the \softline
Transfiguration, see Jeffrey Schnapp ("Trasfigurazione e metamorfosi nel }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  dantesco," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la Bibbia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. G. Barblan [Florence: Olschki, 1988], pp. 273-92).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Those dressed in the white of faith in Christ to come (we will soon find out that \softline
they represent the Hebrew Scriptures) are presented as followers of the seven Gifts of the Holy \softline
Spirit or of the seven spirits of God (Apoc. 4:4), not as the leaders they surely were on their own \softline
terms.  Simone Marchesi ("A Rhetoric of Faith: Dante's Poetics in the Transition from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari \softline
eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 " [Doctoral disseration, Princeton University, 2002]) argues that \softline
Augustine's discussion of biblical hermeneutics in  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De doctrina christiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.7) helps to define \softline
more precisely the nature and role of the seven candlesticks in the procession.  Augustine, \softline
prescribing a spiritual discipline for biblical interpreters, patterns his instruction on the seven \softline
spiritual gifts (Isaiah 11:2-3).  These gifts are the spirits of wisdom, intellect, counsel, fortitude, \softline
knowledge, piety, and fear of God (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sapientia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 intellectus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 consilium}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fortitudo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scientia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pietas}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 timor Dei}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Just as in Dante's procession the candlesticks precede the pageant of the \softline
canonical books and cover them with their sevenfold light, so in Augustine the discussion of the \softline
seven gifts is preliminary to his treatment of the biblical canon in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De doctrina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and frames that \softline
discussion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante, facing east, has the stream to his left, as he has all along, and sees the \softline
pageant approach him on the far side of the narrow water.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab That the poet emphasizes his left side so strongly may indicate his sense of his mortal \softline
unworthiness to look upon such wonders.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The candlestick-paintbrushes leave streaks above the entire procession, as the sun \softline
colors the rainbow and the moon (Delia, Diana, born on the island of Delos) its halo.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These banners form, as it were, a canopy over the entire procession.  The ten \softline
paces that separate the two outer ones are sometimes allegorized by commentators.  On the other \softline
hand, they may simply imply the triumphal perfection of the procession, since ten is known as the \softline
number of God's perfection (as is 100, 1,000, etc.), since 1 + 0 = 1.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 83-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The twelve ranks, two abreast, dressed in white (see vv. 64-66) and crowned with \softline
white lilies, are the twenty-four books of the Old Testament.  In the Book of Revelation (Apoc. \softline
4:4) there are twenty-four elders, clothed in white, seated around the throne of Judgment.  They \softline
are sometimes interpreted as representing the twelve tribes of Israel and the twelve apostles.  Here 
they clearly represent the books of the Old Testament according to St. Jerome's accountancy in \softline
his Prologue to his Latin translation of the Bible.  (Pietro di Dante [comm. to vv. 82-84] cites \softline
Jerome's discussion of the books of the Old Testament in his Prologue to the Book of Daniel.)  It \softline
is clear also that Dante is in this part of the procession referring to books and not authors, for \softline
these would be fewer (e.g., Moses was 'author' of five of them).  He will change tactics when he \softline
comes to the New Testament (see vv. 133-144).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The faith in Christ to come of the Hebrew scriptures is indicated by the elders' \softline
salute to Mary as mother of Christ.  See Luke 1.28: 'Bless{\f3 \'50}d are you among women.'  Mary does \softline
not appear in the procession.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 92-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The four creatures clad in the green of hope are the representations of the four \softline
gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, traditionally portrayed, respectively, as angel (or man), \softline
lion, ox, and eagle.  These identifications derive from Ezechiel (10:4-14) and the Book of \softline
Revelation (Apoc. 4:6-8).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The six wings are found in the Apocalypse (Apoc. 4:8) but not in Ezechiel (1:6), \softline
where they are four (see verse 105).  The reference is to the hundred eyes of Ovid's Argus (see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.568-723).  Jove chose Io as a victim of his desire.  When jealous Juno came near them, \softline
he changed Io into a heifer, but Juno remained suspicious and sent Argus, with his hundred eyes, \softline
to watch over Io.  Jove despatched Mercury to slay him, which he did after telling a long tale that \softline
closed his eyes in sleep.  Juno put those hundred eyes into the feathers of the peacock.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante's reference intrinsically distinguishes between the eyes of dead Argus and these \softline
living visionary eyes that have loftier purpose than guarding pretty heifers.  For a study of the \softline
resonances of the Io narrative in the following cantos see Jessica Levenstein ("The Pilgrim, the \softline
Poet, and the Cowgirl: Dante's Alter-}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Io}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX-XXXI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  114 [1996], \softline
pp. 189-208).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the fifth address to the reader in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For the poet's insistence on \softline
the constraints on his ability to expand his verse, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.139-141 and the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.136-141.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-104.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante refers us to the lengthy passage in Ezechiel (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXIX.94-96) for the details of the appearance of the four gospel beasts.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Lombardi (comm. to vv. 104-105) is perhaps unique in his understanding of why Dante \softline
preferred John's six to Ezechiel's four.  Bishop Primasius, he says, the student of St. Augustine, \softline
commenting on the fourth chapter of the Apocalypse, said that the beasts have six wings because \softline
six is the number of the sixth and final age, after which we will come to the fullness of time \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 plenitudo temporum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  There is nothing like consensus on a solution for this problem, but \softline
Lombardi's thesis is, if nothing else, original.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's claim here mirrors the pretext of the entire poem; his experience of the \softline
otherworld is to be treated as actual and not as imagined.  As a result, his authority as teller of the \softline
tale is absolute, and even biblical testimony is secondary to his own.  Lucia Battaglia Ricci, in her \softline
essay "Polisemanticit{\f3 \'42} e struttura della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 " (in her }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la tradizione letteraria 
medievale}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Pisa: Giardini, 1983 (1975)]), pp. 92-95, saw that this phrasing insisted on the \softline
historical footing of Dante's experience of the pageant.  In the same year, Hollander had made a \softline
more pointed observation (if mistakenly referring it to the griffin rather than to the four gospel \softline
beasts), which he repeated soon after ("Literary Consciousness and the Consciousness of \softline
Literature," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sewanee Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  83 [1975], p. 123; "Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Theologus-Poeta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  94 \softline
[1976], p. 112; "Dante's Poetics," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sewanee Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  85 [1977], pp. 406-7).  See the second of \softline
these passages: 'Where does authority lie here?  In the primacy of the author's vision.  A writer \softline
willing to accept a fictional pretext for his work would never have written so prideful a statement, \softline
would have been content with the more "honest" and humble "And here I follow John."'  Several \softline
other American Dantists now seem committed to this view (e.g., Hawkins, Barolini, Kleinhenz).  \softline
It is also true that at moments in the commentary tradition there has been an awareness of a \softline
certain self-consciousness in Dante's locution.  See Jacopo della Lana (comm. to vv. 103-105): \softline
'the vision, similar to mine, of John the Evangelist.'  But the far more common response is fairly \softline
represented by the paraphrase found in the Anonimo Fiorentino (comm. to vv. 100-105): 'I agree \softline
with John.'  Among more recent commentators perhaps only Poletto (comm. to vv. 100-105) \softline
seems to be aware that Dante has seized more authority than he really should have.  Poletto is \softline
reminded of someone whom he knew who, involved in a discussion of Dante, announced to those \softline
assembled that 'even Vellutello agrees with my opinion.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-107.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The chariot, as will become evident, represents the Church, an opinion for \softline
which there is essential consensus.  Its two wheels, however, are variously interpreted.  Do they \softline
represent the two Testaments (but these are fully represented in the pageant, as Bosco/Reggio \softline
[comm. to verse 107] rightly object)?  Wisdom and Love?  The active and the contemplative life?  \softline
We probably need to understand literally that Dante wanted his chariot to look like something, not \softline
a four-wheeled ox-cart, but a two-wheeled Roman triumphal chariot.  It may be better to leave \softline
allegory to one side.  Scartazzini (comm. to vv. 106-120) offers a scathing review of the attempts \softline
mentioned above and still others.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The griffin has only recently become a cause for controversy, even though for six \softline
hundred years it was assumed to signify Christ (e.g., Pietro [Pietro1, comm. to this verse], for \softline
whom 'Gryphon... figurat Christum' [the griffin figures Christ]).  Beginning with Scartazzini \softline
(comm. to vv. 106-120), commentators point to Isidore of Seville's description (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etym}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XII.xxii.17) of the griffin as being half lion and half eagle, and then going on to say that Christ is \softline
like both lion and eagle.  Sergio Cristaldi's neglected and useful study ("'Per dissimilia.'  Saggio sul \softline
grifone dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Atti e memorie dell'Arcadia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9 [1988-89], pp. 57-94) of the griffin helps to \softline
address a number of crucial questions.  Taking issue with the 'English school' of rather fanciful \softline
interpretations of the biform beast, he gives reasons to disregard the opinion of Colin Hardie \softline
("The Symbol of the Gryphon in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.108 and Following Cantos," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Centenary \softline
Essays on Dante by Members of the Oxford Dante Society}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1965]), p. 123, \softline
for whom the beast should be read as 'a symbol of Dante's own nature restored, i.e., of his two \softline
"souls," animal and spiritual,' and that of Peter Dronke ("The Procession in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cambridge Readings in Dante's "Comedy,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Kenelm Foster and Patrick Boyde [Cambridge: \softline
Cambridge University Press, 1981 (1978)], pp. 114-37), who thinks the griffin represents the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 daim{\f2\u243\'f3}n}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that Neoplatonists saw as guiding the soul.  And Cristaldi's main discussion answers the \softline
central objection to the standard view of the griffin as emblem of Christ posed by Peter Armour 
(how can a hybrid symbolize Christ?) before Armour (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Griffin and the History of the \softline
World: A Study of the Earthly Paradise ["Purgatorio" XXIX-XXXIII]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, \softline
1989]) made it, showing that Dante was employing the method embraced by Dionysius the \softline
Areopagite, as cited by Thomas Aquinas (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Summa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.i.9): 'It is more fitting that divine things be put \softline
forward in Scripture in the figurations of vile bodies than in those of noble ones' and goes on to \softline
point out (p. 90) that Dante deals with matters propounded in the next article of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Summa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.43-48.  Cristaldi also cites (p. 70) Richard of St. Victor on the legitimate \softline
comparisons of Christ both to lion and to lamb.  Christ was also, we might reflect, at times \softline
referred to as a worm, in a tradition reflecting Job (26:6: 'How much less [is] man, that is a \softline
worm?  And the son of man, that is a worm?'  Bildad's mournful view of humankind is ransomed \softline
by St. Gregory the Great (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Moralia in Iob}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Patrologia Latina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  LXXVI, col. 560), who also cites \softline
Psalms 21:7 (22:6): 'But I am a worm, and no man'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  }{\plain \fs24 \f1 in order to make these words fit Christ, as \softline
had, indeed, St. Augustine before him (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Enarrationes in Psalmos}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 PL}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXVI, col. 137), and see \softline
pseudo-Augustine, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sermones suppositii de tempore}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , CLI.4, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 PL}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIX, col. 2038: 'Christus in \softline
cruce vermis....' [Christ on the cross a worm]).  Such a comparison makes the griffin seem, by \softline
comparison, noble indeed.  And now see Lino Pertile (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La puttana e il gigante: Dal Cantico dei \softline
Cantici al Paradiso Terrestre di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1998]), pp. 143-62, whose arguments \softline
in favor of the griffin as symbolizing Christ seem difficult to counter.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The griffin's enormous wings go up, one on either side of the central pennon \softline
made by the fourth of the seven candlesticks' flaming paintbrush, so as not to disturb the canopy \softline
in any way.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 113-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   His mixture of immortal gold in the part of him that was eagle and the more \softline
'human' red-and-white parts of the lion would surely seem further to identify him with Christ.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This chariot is not only more splendid than those awarded either to Scipio \softline
Africanus (185-129 B.C.), conqueror of Hannibal and destroyer of Carthage, or to the great \softline
Augustus himself (63 B.C.-A.D. 14), the emperor at the 'fullness of time,' when Christ was born in \softline
a world at peace under the rule of Augustus.  Dante goes still further: this chariot makes the sun, \softline
become a chariot for Phaeton's wild misadventure (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.47-324), seem a poor thing by \softline
comparison.  It is striking that this third chariot involves a tragic event -- Phaeton's death -- while \softline
the first two are used to glorious purpose.  We are reminded of God's mercy and of his justice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab That the most significant element in the procession is a triumphal chariot makes it difficult \softline
not to see that this pageant represents the Church Triumphant, i.e., the Church as it shall be in \softline
eternity.  It is only in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII that we shall observe a representation of the Church \softline
Militant.  There is a resemblance in this rhythm to that which we have experienced on all the \softline
seven terraces, namely }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 exempla}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the opposed virtue preceding those of the vice to be purged.  \softline
Here the perfected Church precedes its temporally prior and persecuted self in all its tribulations.  \softline
For this observation, see Richard Lansing ("Narrative Design in Dante's Earthly Paradise," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  112 [1994]), pp. 106-8.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This part of the allegory escapes no one: the three ladies represent the three \softline
theological virtues, charity (red), hope (green), and faith (white).  They stand at the right wheel of \softline
the cart, its better side.  Faith, necessary to a proper form of love, first leads their dance; then it is 
the turn of Charity, necessary to a proper form of Hope.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   At the left wheel we find the four cardinal virtues, associated with Roman virtue \softline
by their purple robes, temperance, justice, fortitude, and prudence (represented by the three-eyed \softline
lady, since she is knowledgeable about past, present, and future).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We now come to the second Christian section of the pageant, those who came \softline
after Christ.  We recognize Luke as the doctor he was, author of the Acts of the Apostles; Paul as \softline
the sword-bearer (see Ephesians 6:17), where Paul speaks of the sword of the spirit, that is, the \softline
word of God).  And, as Singleton points out (comm. to vv. 139-140), the sword also represents \softline
Paul's martyrdom.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Here Dante uses the authors of New Testament texts to represent their works, and not \softline
vice versa, as he had done for the Old Testament.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.83-84.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142-144.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The writers of the lesser Epistles (James, Peter, John, and Jude) are followed by \softline
the Apocalypse, its author John depicted as sleeping the mystic sleep of vision.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 145-150.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These seven authors or books all are typified not by the white of faith, as was \softline
the Old Testament, but by the red of love (for Christ come).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab On the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 brolo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (which we have translated 'garland') see Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
Third Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1903)]), pp. 216-18, arguing that, \softline
since the unusual word seems to have a sense of rough wooded land, of thickets, it thus \softline
emphasizes the thick, luxuriant character of the flowers that these elders wear upon their heads.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Gian Luca Pierotti ("La }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 filia solis }{\plain \fs24 \f1 di Bonaventura e i cambiamenti di colore in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24 \f1  33 [1981], p. 220 (n. 12) has offered the following census of the \softline
pageant:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 1)  24 books of the Old Testament\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 2)   4 gospels: Matthew, Mark, Luke, John\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 3)   1 griffin\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 4)   3 theological virtues (love, hope, faith)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 5)   4 cardinal virtues (prudence, fortitude, temperance, justice)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 6)   2 'authors' of Book of Acts & major Epistles: Luke and Paul\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 7)   4 'authors' of lesser Epistles: Peter, James, John, Jude\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 8)   1 Apocalypse: John\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Total:       43  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Canto XXX will add 100 angels and Beatrice to bring the number to 144, the mystical \softline
number (144,000) of the Church Triumphant.  See Revelation 7:4, 14.1, 14:3.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 151-154.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The canto ends with the thunderclap, arresting all, from the front to the back of \softline
the procession, as they await an obviously momentous event.\par
}}