{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 28}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We enter the third and final part of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  These divisions, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 antipurgatorium}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the \softline
first naming of 'ante-purgatory' in the commentaries), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 purgatorium}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 postpurgatorium}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , are \softline
found in Benvenuto da Imola (general note to the canto).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante's first word, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vago}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (eager) ties him to Ulysses, eager for adventure (for the word \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vago}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.22-24).  Virgil had told him, in his final instruction (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXVII.138), that in the garden he will be free either to sit (thus imitating Rachel, the \softline
contemplative life) or to move about (thus imitating Leah, the active life).  We should not be \softline
surprised that Dante makes the latter choice.  Since, as we shall see, his contemplative faculties \softline
are at this point faulty at best, his choice will be reflected in his intellectual difficulties with \softline
understanding the nature of the love represented by the beautiful woman he will shortly meet (and \softline
who is eventually identified as Matelda).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Matelda will only be named at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.119.  It may be helpful to the reader to \softline
deal with her identity and her role in the poem before then.  However, the reader should not \softline
forget that Dante has presented this woman as nameless, perhaps, among other reasons, to make \softline
us pay attention to what she means rather than concentrating on who she is.  For the question of \softline
her identity, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.40-42.  For a study of the numerological \softline
significance of the number of this canto, 28, which the writer demonstrates to have a long \softline
standing among Neoplatonists (Martianus Capella), St. Augustine (that 'reformed Neoplatonist'), \softline
and other Fathers of the Church (e.g., the Venerable Bede), see Victoria Kirkham ("Dante's \softline
Polysynchrony: a Perfectly Timed Entry into Eden," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Filologia e critica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  20 [1995]), pp. 336-44.  \softline
To them it was a 'perfect number' for several reasons, arithmetical and geometric in nature.  \softline
Kirkham also points out (p. 348 [n. 29]) that Matelda is the twenty-eighth woman encountered in \softline
the poem.  (See her earlier discussion in "Eleven Is for Evil: Measured Trespass in Dante's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegorica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 [1989], pp. 27-50).  Kirkham's arguments are engaging.  One \softline
wonders, nonetheless, how much of this tradition held Dante's attention as he wrote this canto; \softline
one wonders, as well, why the cantos numbered 28 in the other two }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  seem not to have the \softline
same numerological proclivity (they are not, in any case, referred to in Kirkham's discussion).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 2.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This forest is sacred, in the words of Andreoli (comm. to this verse) 'because it was \softline
planted by the very hands of God.'  Many discussants of the opening of this canto realize that the \softline
poet is drawing a line across the page between the last canto and this one.  Dante has finished the \softline
first half of the journey and now he finds himself in a very different sort of forest from the dark \softline
wood in which he came to his senses at the opening of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  That wood was 'aspra e forte' \softline
(harsh and dense [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.5]) while this forest is 'spessa e viva' (thick and verdant).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is instructive and amusing to consider the opening remarks of Benvenuto da Imola \softline
(comm. to vv. 1-6) as he addresses this canto: 'Before I come to its literal meaning, I would like \softline
you first to note that this entire chapter is figurative and allegorical, for otherwise it would in large \softline
measure be fatuous and untrue.'  Benvenuto is essentially denying the claim made by the poet that \softline
this is the actual garden of Eden.  He goes on to assert that the garden signifies 'the happy state of \softline
man in the perfection of his virtue, as much as is possible in this miserable life of ours.'  \softline
Benvenuto's commentary, which remains one of the most intelligent and helpful ever written, has \softline
a blind eye for Dante's theological strategies.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 5.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In this forest Dante the sightseer can move }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lento lento}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (very slowly), enjoying his \softline
surroundings.  Here he will not be subject to the fear that afflicted him in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 selva oscura}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The gentle breeze, as we shall learn (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.85-87), surprises Dante, who had \softline
expected to find no meteorological disturbance of any kind in the garden.  It strikes upon his \softline
brow, perhaps reminding us that that was where the seven P's were inscribed on him by the \softline
warder of the purgatorial gate (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.112).  He is, as was Adam when he found himself in this \softline
place 6,499 years ago (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.119-123), innocent.  Unlike Adam, Dante will not fall in it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   From the westward movement of the boughs of the trees we learn that the wind in \softline
the garden blows from the east, a propitious source, since it is associated with the rising sun and \softline
thus with Christ, often represented as the sun climbing the sky, resurrected from the darkness of \softline
death.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The morning breeze does not disturb the birds plying their crafts (singing and \softline
nesting, according to John of Serravalle [comm. to vv. 7-15], but surely flying as well).  Lest the \softline
reader believe these birds are actually birds, Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 7-15) reveals what they \softline
'really' represent: 'wise and virtuous men, who rise to the heights of virtue and joyfully sing their \softline
praise of God.'  An allegorical temper can steal the joy from any poem.  In the summer of 1979 \softline
Ted Blaisdell, himself a singer and then a student at Dartmouth, wondered whether these singing \softline
birds are to be taken as the immortal birds that were in Eden 6500 years ago.  One does not know \softline
on what grounds that question might be answered, but is pleased with the question.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The harmony of birdsong and forest murmur, treble and bass, respectively, reveal the \softline
favorable conjunction of art (the birdsong) and nature (the wind in the trees) in Eden.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sound of the forest is compared to that made by the trees in the great pine \softline
forest near Ravenna when it is stirred by the strong wind from Africa, released, at least in myth, \softline
from Aeolus's bag of the winds.  John of Serravalle, jogged by the mention of Chiassi to think of \softline
the city of Ravenna, adds a personal note to his commentary (comm. to vv. 16-21): Dante, he \softline
says, is buried in the Franciscan monastery in Ravenna and he once offered prayers there for the \softline
poet's soul.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The image of wind making melody on a natural instrument, the Aeolian harp, became a \softline
staple of Romantic literature.  In his biography of the great American musician Louis Armstrong \softline
Laurence Bergren (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Louis Armstrong: An Extravagant Life}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [New York: Broadway, 1997]), p. \softline
261, reports that another American jazzman, Eddie Condon, commenting on the quantity and \softline
quality of jazz playing in Chicago in 1925, had this to say: 'Around midnight you could hold your \softline
instrument in the middle of the street and the air would play it.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Insisting again on the slowness, and thus the calm, of his progress (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXVIII.5), Dante implicitly contrasts his entrance into the world of sin in the first canto of the \softline
poem with his arrival in the garden.  Here, just as there, he takes stock by looking back through a \softline
wood toward his point of entrance: 'How I came there I cannot really tell, / I was so full of sleep / \softline
when I forsook the one true way' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.10-12), but the differences between the two places \softline
overwhelm their similarities.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 selva antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (ancient forest) possibly reflects, as commentators, beginning with 
Tommaseo (comm. to these verses) have suggested, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.179: 'itur in antiquam silvam' (they \softline
move into the ancient forest).  Virgil is speaking of Aeneas and his men, engaged in cutting down \softline
trees for the funeral pyre of Misenus, and the forest is that at Cumae, where Aeneas will shortly \softline
find the golden bough that will allow him to enter the underworld.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This stream is Lethe, the river of oblivion in classical literature, in which Christians \softline
in Dante's Eden leave the memory of their sins behind them for eternity, as Matelda will explain \softline
(vv. 127-128).  For this river Tommaseo (comm. to these verses) cites Virgil, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.19: \softline
'tenuis fugiens per gramina rivus' (a slender stream stealing through the grassy field).  Virgil is \softline
describing an appropriate spot in which to set up a hive in order to make honey.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 32-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beginning with Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 25-27) commentators have suggested a \softline
source in Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.388-391) for the shaded garden here, the Sicilian scene of Proserpina's \softline
rape (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.49-51), where the forests above the pools in the hills of Enna keep them \softline
protected from Apollo's rays.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The fascination of the character introduced anonymously here (we will not find out \softline
her name until }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.119) has proven so great that in Dante studies there is practically a \softline
separate industry devoted to problems associated with her identity and her significance.  The \softline
position taken in what follows is based on the following given: Matelda (that is the name that we \softline
eventually hear, and it is spelled with an 'e' [and not an 'i'] in all the manuscripts consulted by \softline
Petrocchi) is not 'allegorical' but historical.  Almost all the early commentators believe that she is \softline
Matilda of Tuscany (1046-1115).  Their cases pleaded from ca. 1860 on, the two principal other \softline
historical claimants to the role are thirteenth-century German nuns, Mechthild of Magdeburg and \softline
Mechthild of Hackeborn, but they have both been mainly abandoned in recent and current \softline
discussions.  Starting in the nineteenth century there was a reaction against all such historical \softline
figures and, led by Scartazzini, once he came over to this view, an attempt to establish her identity \softline
as one of the 'other women' in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a position given support in our own era by so \softline
eminent a student of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as Gianfranco Contini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Un' idea di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: Einaudi, \softline
1976]), pp. 173-74.  A calmer and more sensible survey than Scartazzini's is found in Moore \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Third Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1903)]), pp. \softline
210-16; he ends up cautiously maintaining the claim of Matilda of Tuscany.  Indeed, a close \softline
reading of Matelda tends to make such interpretations as Scartazzini's and his latter-day followers, \softline
based in the Romantic era and in a Romantic sensibility, difficult to accept; and Matelda's role in \softline
the poem is probably too theologically determined to have encouraged such attempts.  If she is the \softline
representative of the active life, she must surely have more }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gravitas}{\plain \fs24 \f1  than those young girls, must \softline
surely be more recognizable to a wider public.  Thus it is interesting to consider Cino da Pistoia's \softline
praise of Contessa Matilda as a fitting representative of the active life (see Hollander ["Dante and \softline
Cino da Pistoia," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  110 (1992)], p. 231 [n. 106]).  As opposed to the nuns, who are \softline
contemplatives, Matelda's service to the Church is clearly related to the active life, based precisely \softline
on the Church's own favorite mode for the laity's involvement: financial support.  None of the \softline
young women in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is easily understood in any such role.  This is to take issue with \softline
Hollander's earlier view (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1969], pp. 152-53).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For 77 screens of text in the Dante Dartmouth Project dedicated to the problem of 
Matelda see Scartazzini (comm. to verse 148), with an immense bibliography even though it \softline
reaches only to 1873.  He reviews seven candidates who have had major appeal to various and \softline
three women mentioned in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Beatrice's dead friend, and students \softline
of the problem (Matilda of Tuscany, the mother of Emperor Otto the Great, the two German nuns \softline
named Mechthild, Guido Cavalcanti's Giovanna) and rules all of these out, finally settling on an \softline
unlikely choice, the 'screen lady' of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For the allegorical sense of Matelda he opts \softline
for 'simbolo del ministerio ecclesiastico' (symbol of the Church's ministry).  Victoria Kirkham \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII," in  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy," Introductory Readings II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, Charlottesville: University of \softline
Virginia, 1993]), p. 422, gives a list of 35 possible allegorical meanings that have been variously \softline
proposed and then, not chastised by the opprobrium the very list would offer such an attempt, \softline
goes on to champion one of these: Wisdom.  Yet we have no reason to believe that there is any \softline
allegorical meaning to Matelda.  Why was not the Countess of Tuscany (Kirkham's choice for her \softline
historical meaning) enough?  For similar behavior see Giovanni Pascoli (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sotto il velame: saggio \softline
d'un' interpretazione generale del poema sacro}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Messina: Muglia, 1900]), p. 565, in his usual \softline
magisterial tones, declaring that Matelda is 'l'arte nipote a Dio' (Art, God's grandchild [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XI.105]).  Such asseverations are fairly typical of the label-attaching that is frequent among \softline
Matelda's allegorizers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Matilda of Tuscany, by mere virtue of having so much support in the early commentaries \softline
(the first real opposition to her occurs only in 1732 in Venturi [comm. to verse 40]), is probably \softline
the most intelligent choice.  For an attempt to restore her identity see Villa ("In favore della Gran \softline
Contessa," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaderni del Dipartimento di lingue e letterature neolatine dell'Istituto universitario \softline
di Bergamo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1987], pp. 67-76).  However, she is nonetheless problematic for at least three \softline
reasons.  (1) She was fiercely supportive of the political claims of the Church against the emperor; \softline
(2) she is presented here as a beautiful young woman, which little accords with her descriptions in \softline
the chronicles, which make her seem little less than a virago, a female soldier, and surely less \softline
'romantic' than would accord with such a portrait as Dante's; (3) since the function she performs \softline
in the garden seems to be universal (but there is debate about this, with some believing that she is \softline
only here for Dante's visit [see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.128-135]), the fact that she could not \softline
have begun her task until 1115 is a bar to her candidacy.  This, however, is true for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 all}{\plain \fs24 \f1  candidates, \softline
as it was not, for instance, for that other }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 genius loci}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Cato (presiding over purgatory as Matelda \softline
presides over Eden), who died before Christ harrowed hell, before there were any souls in \softline
purgatory, and who thus was able to take up his function only when there were those who \softline
required it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Someone (it may have been Charles Singleton) once remarked that if we did not know \softline
Matelda's name we would know much more readily who she is.  In her role in the garden of Eden \softline
she is, there can hardly be a doubt, a representation of unfallen Eve.  The commentary tradition, \softline
so taken up with the puzzle of her name, does not see the plain reference to the first female being \softline
before her fall, Eve dressing and keeping the garden.  Fallani (comm. to verse 148), in passing, \softline
refers to Matelda as the 'new Eve.'  Hermann Gmelin (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Kommentar: der L{\f2\u228\'e4}uterungsberg}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Stuttgart: Klett, 1955]), p. 440, speaks plainly: she is 'eine }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 figura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  der Eva vor dem S{\f2\u252\'fc}ndenfall' (a \softline
figure of Eve before the Fall).  See also A. Bartlett Giamatti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Earthly Paradise and the \softline
Renaissance Epic}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966]), p. 110: 'she is an Eve who will \softline
not fall.'  Singleton, having decided that she is presented as the 'new Astraea' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)], pp. 190-201), has difficulty saying as clearly 
that she is Eve, too; it is nonetheless clear from his treatment of Matelda's function in the poem \softline
that he sees her as another Eve (see pp. 204-11).  (See also Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969)], pp. 153-58.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As the 'new' (or 'original old' or 'perpetually new') Eve, she makes sense.  She represents \softline
the active life that Leah led us to expect in her (as Rachel associates Beatrice with the \softline
contemplative life) and she can have been here from the beginning of purgation.  And it is also \softline
true that, in Genesis, unfallen Eve is never named; she is only named }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 after}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the fall, when Adam \softline
calls his wife 'Eve' (Genesis 3:20).  Matelda, too, is named belatedly.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Here the reader should probably be aware of a distinction between what the poet \softline
knows of Matelda's significance and what the character makes of her.  A strategic awareness of \softline
the evident difference in perspective between narrator and character as a general aspect of the \softline
poem is, surprisingly enough, a fairly recent development.  See Leo Spitzer ("A Note on the \softline
Poetic and the Empirical 'I' in Medieval Authors," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Traditio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 [1946]), pp. 414-22; Charles \softline
Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 An Essay on the "Vita Nuova"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1977 \softline
(1949)]), p. 25; Gianfranco Contini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Un' idea di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: Einaudi, 1976 (1958)]), pp. 33-62;  \softline
Rocco Montano (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Storia della poesia di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. I [Naples: Quaderni di Delta, 1962]), pp. 367-76.  See also Michelangelo Picone ("Dante come autore/narratore della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuova \softline
Rivista di Letteratura Italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1999], pp. 9-26) as well as Mario Aversano ("Il canto XXXII \softline
del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La quinta rota: Studi sulla "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: Tirrenia,1988]), p. 40 and n., \softline
pointing out that Francesco D'Ovidio (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto dei Simoniaci}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Naples: Guida, 1932]), p. 279, had \softline
already made a telling observation along exactly these lines.  And see the somewhat over-emphatic claim of Giovanni Cecchetti ("The Statius Episode: Observations on Dante's Conception \softline
of Poetry," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  7 [1990]), p. 112, that the distinction actually goes back \softline
to the early commentators (although he admits that their awareness of the distinction between \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 auctor}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 agens}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is not always clear [to which may be added the observation that it is anything \softline
but systematic]).  Cecchetti suggests that Singleton had in fact derived his version of the concept \softline
from the commentary of G. A. Venturi (Milano, 1924).  See also Francesco Mazzoni's view \softline
("L'Epistola a Cangrande," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rendiconti della Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Classe di Scienze \softline
morali, storiche e filologiche] Ser. 8, 10 [1955]), pp. 174-78, that Dante himself, in the Epistle to \softline
Cangrande (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epist}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.xiv.38), used the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 agens}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to refer, not to himself as author, but to the \softline
character who bears his name in the work.  His view, while attractive, has not won general \softline
support; see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Epistle to Cangrande}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, \softline
1993]), pp. 21-22.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante sees that Matelda is 'in love' and wants to understand what she is singing.  \softline
The response of Venturi (comm. to verse 43) indicates that the current debate was already in \softline
progress nearly 300 years ago.  He takes Matelda to be singing 'of divine love and not, as some \softline
ignorant fools understand, of the bestial kind.'  However, many commentators, aroused by the \softline
sensual tone of the protagonist's responses, disagree.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The first major use of Guido Cavalcanti's poem, 'In un boschetto trova' pasturella' (In a \softline
little wood I came upon a shepherd girl), to amplify the meaning of this scene was made by \softline
Charles Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)]), pp. \softline
214-16, even if he was not the first to call attention to its importance here (see Scartazzini [comm. \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.1]).  This }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ballata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is in a genre worked previously by dozens of French and 
Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al poets, a genre in which poets who more usually wrote songs about unattainable ladies \softline
had their 'revenge,' as it were.  The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastourelle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastorella}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the genre is named for the willing \softline
and socially unimportant shepherdess it celebrates) generally, as in Cavalcanti's lyric, has a high-born protagonist ride into a clearing in a wood where he finds a lovely and willing young woman \softline
who gives him sexual pleasure at his merest request (indeed, in Cavalcanti's poem, it is she who \softline
proposes the amorous encounter to him).  Any study of this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ballata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  makes it immediately clear \softline
that Dante had it on his mind as he composed this canto.  But see Poggioli ("Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 poco tempo \softline
silvano}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : or a 'Pastoral Oasis' in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annual Report of the Dante Society}{\plain \fs24 \f1  80 [1962], \softline
pp. 1-20), who only gingerly accepts the likelihood of so contemporary and erotic a connection, \softline
since he is more interested in the more sedate influence of the classical tradition of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 locus \softline
amoenus }{\plain \fs24 \f1 (pleasant place, the pastoral escape from 'civilization').  And see, opposing the view that \softline
Matelda is a 'pastorella' in any meaningful way, Patrizia Grimaldi Pizzorno ("Matelda's Dance and \softline
the Smile of the Poets," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  112 [1994], pp. 115-32).  See also Massimiliano Chiamenti \softline
("Corollario oitanico al canto ventottesimo del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo e rinascimento}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13 [1999], \softline
pp. 207-20), who argues that the generic identity of the lyric moment is better understood as \softline
reflecting the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 reverdie}{\plain \fs24 \f1  than the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastourelle}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  It nonetheless clearly reflects a very particular poem \softline
of Guido Cavalcanti that happens to be a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastorella}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as Barolini recognizes (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984]), pp. 148-53.  For a wider sense of the generic \softline
classifications of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastourelle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Dan Octavian Cepraga ("Sistema dei generi lirici e dinamiche \softline
compilative: la posizione della pastorella nei canzonieri occitanici," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Critica del testo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [2000], pp. \softline
827-70).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Awareness of Cavalcanti's poem as germane to Dante began with the Anonimo Fiorentino \softline
(comm. to vv. 97-99), who merely mentions the poem in his note detailing Cavalcanti's works.  \softline
Gregorio Di Siena (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.55) was the first to point out that the opening line of the next \softline
canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.1), 'Cantando come donna innamorata' (like a lady touched by love she sang), \softline
derived from Guido's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastorella}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the verse 'cantava come fosse 'nnamorata'; he also argued that \softline
Dante had already cited the second verse of Guido's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastorella}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in Virgil's description of Beatrice \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.  If he is correct, Dante would then have borrowed Guido's frankly sensual portrait of \softline
a young woman to describe ladies of a far more spiritual inclination.  Scartazzini (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXIX.1) was the first to suggest that many elements of Cavalcanti's poem were active \softline
participants, as it were, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.  Bosco (comm. to vv. 63-68) offers the fullest \softline
treatment found in the commentaries, but does not acknowledge his predecessors.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Once we see Guido's poem behind Dante's we can also discern an authorial strategy \softline
behind its presence.  Matelda does not come as a shepherdess, but as the unfallen Eve, virginal, \softline
upright, completely uninterested in sex.  It is the protagonist, his head full of Cavalcantian \softline
sexuality, who imagines that she is in love with him, just like a pretty }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastorella}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  It will take him \softline
some time to discover the wrongness of his view of her, and some of his readers have yet to make \softline
that discovery.  For the view that Dante's sexual desire for Matelda is 'innocent and happy' see \softline
Peter Dronke ("Viaggi al Paradiso terrestre," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: da Firenze all'aldil{\f3 \'42}.  Atti del terzo \softline
Seminario dantesco internazionale}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), pp. 94-95.  Victoria Kirkham ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII," in  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy," Introductory \softline
Readings II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, \softline
Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1993]), p. 424, also believes that she represents sensual \softline
love (she is 'thoroughly sensual and Venerean').\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist first associates Matelda with Ovid's Proserpina (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.391-401), seen, grasped, and carried off by Pluto.  Dante, who has begun this scene believing that \softline
Matelda is in love with him, now lets his erotic misinterpretation show; he thinks he is in the role \softline
of Pluto to her Proserpina because he thinks she is a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastorella}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-58.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Playing off Dante's carnal appreciation of her meaning, Matelda comes closer so \softline
that he can hear the words of her song, thus acceding to his request.  She is portrayed, in simile, \softline
as being as chaste as virginity itself.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 59-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's wish, expressed at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.48, to make out the words of \softline
Matelda's song, is here granted.  Few texts in the poem have been as poorly treated by the \softline
commentators as this one.  The protagonist's wish made }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 us}{\plain \fs24 \f1  want to know what Matelda was \softline
singing; and here we learn that Dante now can make out her words.  However, the poet does not \softline
tell us what she sang.  It is at least possible that he expected us to puzzle out the identity of her \softline
song.  No one has.  Perhaps it is the Psalm to which she refers at verse 80, perhaps it is another \softline
song altogether.  Our teachers, with only one exception, are silent, merely saying the obvious, that \softline
Dante understood what she was singing, and, with only the exceptions of Isidoro Del Lungo \softline
(comm. to verse 60) and Charles Singleton (comm. to verse 60), not even bothering to point out \softline
that the poet refuses to share this information with us.  About all that can safely be said is that she \softline
probably sings a song that is kindred in spirit to the Psalm to which she later refers (see the note \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.80-81).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Matelda's gaze, the poet remembers, was like the amorous gaze of Venus, \softline
wounded by mistake by the arrow of her son, Cupid, and consequently madly in love with Adonis, \softline
in a second Ovidian reminiscence (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.525-532).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Matelda, resuming her role as a latter-day Leah (and Eve as well), picks the self-seeding plants the nature of which she will disclose to Dante at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.109-120.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first reference is to the Persian king Xerxes, who found a way to cross the \softline
wide Hellespont in 480 B.C. by having his vast army build a bridge out of ships lashed together; \softline
defeated by the Greeks whom he was attacking, he had to sail home in ignominy in a small boat.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The sight of this lady moved the protagonist, the poet informs us, to lustful thoughts like \softline
those of Leander, unable to cross the rough seas of the Dardanelles from Abydos to make love to \softline
his girlfriend Hero at Sestos, the third Ovidian reference, this time to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Heroides}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (XVIII).  \softline
Leander finally drowned in his attempt to swim to Hero.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab These three classical allusions to destructive sexual passions, aligning Matelda, in the \softline
protagonist's eyes, with Proserpina, Venus, and Hero, and himself with Pluto, Adonis, and \softline
Leander, function, as Hollander suggested (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: \softline
Princeton University Press, 1969]), pp. 154-58, much as did the associations with the dream in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX, in which three classical references, involving rape or other destructive behavior, \softline
were balanced and corrected by the Christian benevolence of St. Lucy.  Here the protagonist's \softline
sexualized vision of Matelda yields to a better understanding once she reveals the nature of her \softline
love: Christian charity.  Once she does so, the protagonist, whose will came through his self-produced temptation well enough (he does not attempt to cross the narrow stream to be with 
her), finally has his understanding corrected and no longer thinks of Matelda in sexual terms for \softline
the rest of his six cantos in the garden.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Some readers have found the three paces that must not yet be crossed allegories of \softline
the three 'steps' of confession, contrition, and satisfaction that await Dante later when he must \softline
deal with Beatrice's accusation in cantos XXX and XXXI.  Others think they are only indicative \softline
of a short distance and have no deeper meaning.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-80.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Matelda, who has appeared at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.40, finally speaks.  Addressing \softline
all three poets (we have surely forgotten about the presence of Statius and of Virgil -- as has \softline
Dante), she says things that at least Statius and Dante are able to understand.  They are 'new' (in \softline
the sense that they have never been here before but also in that they are 'new men,' remade, \softline
sinless) and perhaps expect to hear a lament for the fall, for the loss of this place by the human \softline
race because of original sin.  Her message, however, is not the tragic message of the fall but the \softline
comic one of recovery, of paradise regained.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   With regard to the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rido}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Matelda is probably not laughing, as some hold, but \softline
smiling; see Bernhard K{\f2\u246\'f6}nig ("Canto XXVIII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. \softline
Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), p. 441, citing }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(III.viii.1) for a smile as the shining forth of delight in the soul.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 80-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Psalm 91 (92), 'A Psalm or Song for the sabbath day,' begins as follows: 'It is a \softline
good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto your name, O most High.'  The \softline
verse that Matelda refers to, 91:5 in the Vulgate, runs as follows in the English Bible: 'For you, \softline
Lord, have made me glad (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 delectasti me}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) through your work: I will triumph in the work of your \softline
hands' (92:4).  For the similar view of the Psalm found in Peter Abelard's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 expositio in \softline
Hexaemeron,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Singleton (comm. to verse 80); and in Bonaventure's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Itinerarium mentis in \softline
Deum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see Hawkins ("Watching Matelda," in Rachel Jacoff and Jeffrey T. Schnapp, eds., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The \softline
Poetry of Allusion: Virgil and Ovid in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Stanford: Stanford University Press, \softline
1991]), pp. 198-99.  Matelda is expressing her Leah-like devotion to the active life, her delight in \softline
'dressing and keeping the garden' as Eve was enjoined to do (but did not, eating the forbidden \softline
fruit instead).  She is once again joined in our understanding to the unfallen Eve, her constant \softline
typological referent in Dante's garden of Eden.  If we ever had any doubt about the nature of the \softline
love she feels, we do so no longer.  She is 'in love' with God, not with Dante except as she loves \softline
him in God, as we shall see all the saved loving one another (and Dante) in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (III.xv.7) Dante says that the earthly paradise signifies the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 beatitudo \softline
huius vitae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the blessedness of the earthly life).  For discussion see Edward Williamson ("De \softline
Beatitudine Huius Vite," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  118 [2000 (1958)], pp. 109-27).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having cleansed Dante's mind of its impurities, Matelda now assumes, as a sort of \softline
handmaid of Beatrice, the role of teacher, leaving her sexuality a forgotten thought in Dante's \softline
formerly clouded mind.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's double question refers to the explanation of Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.43-72) \softline
that the earthquake marking his liberation from the memory of sin was not, as Dante had 
imagined, a natural meteorological event, but a supernatural one.  Just so the running water of the \softline
stream and the constant breeze, Matelda will explain, are not natural phenomena but supernatural \softline
ones, heavenly artifices to harmonize the physical attributes of this place with its spiritual essence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once again Matelda refers to Dante's mental processes as 'beclouded' or 'befogged'; \softline
first he did not understand the nature of her love (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.81) and now he does not \softline
understand the nature of the garden's nature.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Matelda essentially repeats what Statius had said below (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXVIII.85-87): God limits the natural meteorology of the mountain to the ante-purgatory.  The \softline
first humans, Adam and Eve, were placed in this spot free of any such disturbance; but they \softline
themselves, in their disobedience, disturbed the laws of eternal nature in the garden (vv. 94-96).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'weather' here is thus not the sign of some kind of disturbance, but was, \softline
from the Beginning, the sign of the harmonious essence of the created universe.  The breeze in the \softline
garden, limited to this upper reach of the mountain, was (and is) caused by the movement of the \softline
highest sphere in the heavens, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 primum mobile}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the first moving (which, we will learn \softline
eventually, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , moves toward God in desire and by so doing creates the movement of all \softline
the heavens below it).  That breeze scatters the seeds of most (but not all) of the plants of Eden \softline
down onto the earth below.  And this is why, she explains, that mortals at times cannot find the \softline
source of a plant new to their experience; it has been carried by the wind from Eden and then \softline
somehow across the seas of the southern hemisphere and deposited in the landmass half a world \softline
away.  And this is why Dante will also see some plants here that have no counterpart on earth.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having explained the source and result of the constant breeze in the garden, \softline
Matelda turns to the equally constant water, which also does not suffer the changes of water in \softline
our world, condensing and then being released from the clouds (consider the transformations of \softline
the Arno's waters in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIV.34-36).  What the rivers here 'lose' as they run out of Eden is not \softline
restored from the clouds, but from an eternal fountain in the garden, put into operation by God \softline
Himself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Eleanor Cook ("Scripture as Enigma: Biblical Allusion in Dante's Earthly Paradise," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  117 [1999]), pp. 9-10, points to a source for the description of this remarkable \softline
spring in Hebrews 6:19, where hope is the 'anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having answered both of Dante's questions (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.85-87) Matelda now \softline
turns her attention to the twofold river in this garden.  The Bible says there are four rivers in \softline
Eden, Phison (Ganges), Gehon (Nile), Tigris, and Euphrates (Genesis 2:10-14).  Dante says there \softline
are two, Lethe and Eunoe.  The first of these is looked forward to by Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIV.136-138) in \softline
response to Dante's wrongful assumption that it is a river in hell.  The second, Eunoe, appears to \softline
be no less than a Dantean invention.  Thus Dante has first of all reduced the number of the \softline
garden's rivers from four to two.  Caron Ann Cioffi suggests that he does so in order to avoid \softline
having the same numbers of rivers in this good place as there are in hell (four): Acheron, Styx, \softline
Phlegethon, Cocytus (see 'Eunoe' in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Dante Encyclopedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [ed. Richard Lansing (New York: \softline
Garland, 2000], p. 358).  It was probably also Dante's intent to replace the two he does later name 
(Tigris and Euphrates at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.112) both for practical and symbolic reasons.  It would \softline
have been difficult or impossible to argue that the Tigris and Euphrates ran from Eden to Armenia \softline
and thence into the Persian Gulf; in any case, and as Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: \softline
Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)]), pp. 167-68, has argued, Dante wanted two rivers here \softline
that would serve a purpose in 'the process of man's purgation and redemption from sin.'  And so, \softline
while indicating that he knows we expect those other four rivers, he gives us these two.  Thus, \softline
when he in fact does refer to the 'orthodox' rivers, Tigris and Euphrates, he is winking at the \softline
reader who expects to find them here along with two others.  The fact that, when he does mention \softline
the 'correct' paradisal rivers, he chooses to refer to only two of them seals his playfulness, for \softline
these two rivers, Lethe and Eunoe, look just like them.  For a study of Dante's highly idiosyncratic \softline
hydrography, see Daniel J. Donno ("Moral Hydrography: Dante's Rivers," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language \softline
Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  92 [1977], pp. 130-39.).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Lethe is the classical river of oblivion, present in the poets best known to Dante: Virgil \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.713-715, where drinking from it deprives the soul of its entire remembered experience \softline
and thus prepares it for another life), Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.602-604), Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Theb}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.296-298), \softline
Lucan (Phars. V.221-222).  As for the word Eunoe, a Dantean Greek-derived coinage, \softline
Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 127-129) was perhaps the first commentator to consider Dante as \softline
having cited himself (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.iii.11), when he says that the Empyrean heaven was formed by the \softline
divine mind alone, or Protonoe (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 protos}{\plain \fs24 \f1  = first; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nous}{\plain \fs24 \f1  = mind).  Here Dante reformulates that Greek \softline
term, itself derived by Uguccione da Pisa from Martianus Capella (see Cesare Vasoli [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
in Dante Alighieri, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Opere minori}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. I, part ii (Milan: Ricciardi, 1988)], p. 138n.), into }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 eu}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (good) \softline
and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nous}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (mind -- or here perhaps 'memory').\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   There is some disagreement among the commentators as to whether the rivers' water \softline
taken as a whole (i.e., that of both Lethe and Eunoe) is sweeter than any other taste, or whether \softline
Eunoe's water is even sweeter than Lethe's, as our translation indicates that we believe.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Chiamenti ("Corollario oitanico al canto ventottesimo del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medioevo e \softline
rinascimento}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13 [1999]), pp. 214-15, citing Lewis and Short's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Latin Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , argues for the \softline
classical Latin meaning for the word 'corollary' here, a present or gratuity (e.g., a gift of money \softline
offered in exchange for a garland of flowers), as filtered through Old French poems describing \softline
ladies in gardens.  While we have left the term intact in our translation, we agree with Chiamenti's \softline
inclination to read it in the floral tradition of Romance poems, since the whole passage is so \softline
redolent of such scenes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   When they were inspired on their holy mountain, Parnassus (that is, when they \softline
were most inspired by their muses), the classical poets sang of the age of gold (e.g., Ovid in the \softline
beginning of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metamorphoses}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Virgil in his fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  In doing so, they perhaps had \softline
some intimation of this place, scene of the true 'golden age,' where mankind was created in \softline
innocence and joy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142-144.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ovid's description of the classical 'Eden' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.89-112) is remembered \softline
closely in this tercet.  One of its particulars is arresting.  Where Dante makes his springtime \softline
eternal, in Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.107) it became ephemeral and now leaves us every year: 'ver }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 erat}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
aeternum' (the spring }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 was}{\plain \fs24 \f1  everlasting).  The drama of the fall and resurrection is reflected in this 
tercet.  In this garden humankind was created innocent and fell; nonetheless, the garden awaits \softline
our redemption in its eternal unfallen condition, filled with the nectar and ambrosia of the classical \softline
Golden Age in its Edenic form: fruit and water (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.148-150).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)], pp. \softline
192-99), points out that the virgin Astraea, or Justice, is a significant presence in both Ovid's and \softline
Virgil's presentations of the Golden Age, the last goddess to leave the earth in Ovid's myth, only \softline
to return in Virgil's prophecy.  And just so, for Singleton, does Matelda serve in the role of \softline
Astraea here in Dante's garden, representing original justice (as well as our memory of the \softline
unfallen Eve).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 146-147.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist's series of smiles (beginning at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.109), caused by his \softline
pleasure in the prospect of the joy that Statius will experience once he discovers that he is in the \softline
company of Virgil, is now matched by the two smiling countenances of those two poets as they \softline
understand, through Matelda's 'corollary,' that they have finally found the true Golden Age.\par
}}