{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 25}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The constellations Taurus and Scorpio are 180}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  apart.  The sun at the antipodes has \softline
now moved roughly two hours, from shining down from in front of the constellation Capricorn, \softline
then Sagittarius, and now Taurus, or from noon to two o'clock (as, half the world away, in \softline
Jerusalem it is two in the morning).  Since the travelers had entered this terrace at roughly ten in \softline
the morning (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.115-120), it results that they have spent roughly four hours among the \softline
penitents of Gluttony and will spend approximately the same amount of time from now until they \softline
leave the penitents of Lust (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.65-66), the first two hours traversing the distance \softline
between the two terraces (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.4-6).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The simile stresses the renewed urgency of the climb, with the three poets, led by \softline
Virgil, mounting in single file.  Statius is, as will eventually be made plain, in the middle position \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.48), from which he will shortly respond at length to Dante's question about the \softline
aerial body.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This second simile makes the protagonist a hesitant fledgling stork in relation to \softline
his unspoken request, manifest in the mouth he has opened without yet forming the words of his \softline
question.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 17-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's metaphor has Dante drawing the bowstring of his question so hard and far \softline
that the iron tip of his arrow is touching the shaft of his bow.  These are the first words spoken by \softline
Virgil since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.15 (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.1-3).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 20-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's question, which has been in the back of his mind since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXIII.37-39, addresses the apparent incongruity of the fact that the souls of the penitents of \softline
Gluttony seem to grow thin from not ingesting food.  Such a phenomenon, he has wrongly \softline
assumed, should be associated only with the experience of starvation in a mortal body.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reference is to Ovid's near-epic narrative of the hunt for the Calydonian boar \softline
with its unhappy outcome for Meleager (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.260-546).  He, the son of the king of \softline
Calydon and of Althaea, killed this rampaging animal and gave its skin to Atalanta, with whom he \softline
was in love.  Althaea's two brothers, Plexippus and Toxeus, take the remains of the beast back \softline
from her.  Enraged at the insult to his honor, Meleager kills them.  Seeing the corpses of her \softline
brothers brought into the temple where she was giving thanks for her son's victory, and learning \softline
who had killed them, Althaea is moved to take vengeance, even upon her own son.  When he was \softline
born, the three Fates had determined that he would live only so long as a firebrand remained \softline
unconsumed in a fire into which it had been cast.  Hearing this, Althaea snatched the burning log-end from the fire and doused it in water.  Now she took up again this piece of wood, which she \softline
had preserved, and cast it into a fire, thus causing the death of her own son.  Virgil's point is that \softline
if Dante had understood this principle, that there is a vital relationship between what seem \softline
unrelated phenomena (e.g., the burning of a log-end and the death of a man), he would have \softline
already understood the relationship between body and soul here in purgatory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As a second instance of this principle, Virgil offers the example of a person's 
movements being reflected in a mirror; once again, to an ignorant observer, the two phenomena \softline
might seem to have independent and unrelated causes if the observer did not understand the \softline
principle of speculation (e.g., two Marx brothers in sleeping garments facing each other in an \softline
open doorway and moving in harmony).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is as though Virgil himself understands that his explanations, relying on physical \softline
laws, do not explain the deeper principles involved in the fact that these souls respond with \softline
physical symptoms to a moral sensation.  Dealing with this passage, Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, \softline
comm. to these verses) allegorizes Virgil as 'rational philosophy' and Statius, 'a Christian poet,' as \softline
'moral philosophy.'  It might seem more to the point to realize that Statius, as a saved Christian, \softline
simply knows by revelation some mysterious things that are not known by others, e.g., all \softline
ordinary mortals and all souls who are not saved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius excuses himself for revealing an essential Christian mystery in the presence \softline
of a pagan because of his love for this particular pagan.  John of Serravalle (comm. to vv. 34-36), \softline
perhaps echoing his teacher, Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.10-12) speaks of Virgil's belief \softline
(learned from Plato's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Timaeus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , according to Benvenuto) that the souls of humans come from the \softline
stars and return to them.  While we cannot be certain that Dante shared the first part of this view \softline
(and see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.22-24, for his denial of the second), the 'eternal plan' is at significant variance \softline
from Plato, as Statius's lecture will make plain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius's lecture on embryology may be paraphrased as follows.  He is willing to \softline
deal with Dante's desire to know how the aerial body is formed (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.34-36): (1) After the \softline
'perfect blood' is 'digested' (the fourth digestion) in the heart, having now the power to inform all \softline
the parts of body, it is 'digested' once again and descends into the testicles; (2) it now falls upon \softline
the 'perfect blood' in the vagina; it is 'active,' the latter 'passive'; (3) the male blood now informs \softline
the soul of the new being in the female; (4) but how this soul becomes a human being is not yet \softline
clear (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.37-66).  Once the fetal brain is formed, God, delighted with Nature's work, \softline
breathes into it the (rational) soul, which blends with the already existent souls (vegetative and \softline
sensitive) and makes a single entity, as wine is made by the sun (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.67-78).  At the \softline
moment of death the soul leaves the body but carries with it the potential for both states, the \softline
bodily one 'mute,' the rational one more acute than in life, and falls to Acheron (if damned) or \softline
Tiber (if saved), where it takes on its 'airy body,' which, inseparable as flame from fire, follows it \softline
wherever it goes; insofar as this new being 'remembers' its former shape, it takes on all its former \softline
organs of sense and becomes a 'shade' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.79-108).  This 'lecture' is put to the task of \softline
justifying Dante's presentation of spiritual beings as still possessing, for the purposes of purgation, \softline
their bodily senses even though they have no bodies.  Souls in Heaven, we will discover, have no \softline
such 'aerial bodies,' but are present as pure spirit.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As has been suggested (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.99-138), the organization of each \softline
terrace is fairly formulaic.  Dante remains free, however, to employ the interstices between \softline
terraces to address issues that would perhaps adversely affect the force of descriptions of intense \softline
penance if included among them (Marco Lombardo's lengthy disquisition on the necessary \softline
exercise of the will in canto XVI is an obvious exception, and it is 'excused' by the darkness, \softline
inhibiting descriptions of the penitents, on the terrace of Wrath).  Now that we have come to the \softline
last of these 'lectures,' it may be useful to review them.  At both the beginning and the end of the 
penitential sequence, the poet uses the liminal portions of each terrace only for physical \softline
descriptions of the ascent (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.1-21; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.64-75).  Leaving Pride, however, he \softline
addresses the protagonist's increasing lightness and the removal of his P's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.115-136); at \softline
the end of Envy the 'lecturing' really begins, when Virgil explains Guido del Duca's words about \softline
possession and sharing (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.40-81); at the conclusion of Wrath, the poet reverts to a mere \softline
description of the ascent (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII.61-69), but then, uniquely, devotes the time of arrival on a \softline
new terrace to doctrinal matters, Virgil's lengthy discourse on love (XVII.70-XVIII.85); having \softline
completed his description of Sloth, he has Virgil explain the meaning of the witch in Dante's \softline
dream (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.52-69); with Avarice left behind, he has Statius explain his debt to Virgil \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.1-126); and now the transit from Gluttony to Lust offers occasion for this lecture on \softline
the 'physiology of the spirit,' as it were.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For extremely useful notes on Dante's sources in these verses (37-88), Aristotle, Avicenna, \softline
Averroes, Albertus Magnus, Aquinas, along with reference to Bruno Nardi's important \softline
contribution, "L'origine dell'anima umana secondo Dante" (1931-1932), reprinted in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi di \softline
filosofia medievale}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Rome: Edizioni di "Storia e Letteratura,"1960), to our awareness of Dante's \softline
schooling in these matters, see Singleton's commentary to many of the passages between vv. 37 \softline
and 88 of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'perfect blood' is the end result of a series of four 'digestions' within the body: \softline
in the stomach, the liver, the heart, the members.  Sperm is what remains after the 'fourth \softline
digestion' of the blood, which informs the various members of the body (e.g., heart, brain).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'The perfect place from which it springs' is the heart, from which it flows to become \softline
sperm.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The vegetative soul is the first one formed.  Unlike the vegetative soul of things \softline
that have no higher nature, ours is only the beginning -- our soul has not yet 'come to shore,' its \softline
'voyage' has only begun.  The vegetative soul enables the growth of the physical body.  This \softline
capacity we share with animate matter (things that grow, e.g., plants, as opposed to inanimate \softline
matter, e.g., rocks) and the animals.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 56-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Now, at first resembling the lowest form of animate life, the sea-sponge, the \softline
animal soul begins to take life.  This second soul is known as the 'sensitive soul,' and is the seat of \softline
human emotion, a capacity we share with the animals.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   What Dante has not yet heard (and thus cannot understand) is how this 'animal' \softline
embryo can and does become a human being, i.e., how it receives its rational soul.  The word \softline
'fante,' here translated 'human,' strictly speaking means 'one who speaks.'  Thus an 'infant' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 in-fans}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) \softline
is a human who cannot yet speak.  Here Dante, through Statius, is speaking precisely, but not \softline
technically.  He means to indicate that the rational soul, once it is joined to the embryo, only then \softline
makes this new creature potentially fully human.  And this third capacity of the soul we share with \softline
no other mortal beings (angels are nothing but rational soul, having no bodily form).  For these \softline
three faculties as found in each single human soul, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.1-15.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 62-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The question of the 'possible intellect' was of considerable interest in Dante's day 
and was variously addressed, even among 'orthodox' Christian thinkers (Albertus Magnus and his \softline
pupil Thomas Aquinas had major disagreements about it), partly because its most visible \softline
champion was Averro{\f2\u235\'eb}s (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.144), the twelfth-century Islamic philosopher who had \softline
decided that the possible intellect, which is the potential capacity to perceive universal ideas, \softline
existed apart from any particular human agent.  An eventual result of such a view was to question \softline
or deny the immortality of the individual human soul.  Dante's solution was to make the possible \softline
intellect co-terminous with the rational soul, breathed into the embryo directly by God.  It is not \softline
surprising that Dante, whose ways are often extremely free-wheeling, simply appropriated the \softline
term to his own purpose and, in these few lines, makes the possible intellect 'orthodox.'  See \softline
Cesare Vasoli, "intelletto possibile" (ED.1971.3).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These three tercets mark the climax of the argument and nearly shimmer with \softline
affection as they describe God's love for his human creatures, consummated in the breathing in of \softline
the rational soul, which immediately fuses with the vegetative and sensitive souls to form a single \softline
and immortal entity, capable of intellection and of will.  For the central role of Dante's resolution \softline
of body-soul dualism in the glorified body of the resurrected, see Nancy Lindheim ("Body, Soul, \softline
and Immortality: Some Readings in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  105 [1990], \softline
pp. 1-32.).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a potential relationship between this lesson in embryology and Dante's poetics based in \softline
the inspiration of the loving God, see Mazzotta (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Poet of the Desert}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1979]), pp. 211-16.  See also Freccero (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. \softline
Rachel Jacoff [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986]), pp. 201-5.  Baranski ("Canto \softline
XXV," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone \softline
[Florence: Cesati, 2001], pp. 389-406) expresses some skepticism about this 'metaliterary' view of \softline
the canto proposed by these and other more recent American discussants.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   God's love for us creates a new entity, an immortal soul, out of the raw material of \softline
nature just as the sun creates a new entity, wine, out of the moisture drawn up from the earth by \softline
the grapevine (Jacopo della Lana [comm. to these verses]).  The emphasis is on the new entity's \softline
relation to its formative cause: a human being is the residue of God's spirit interacting with flesh; \softline
wine is a distillation of sunlight and matter.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   At the moment of death (for the role of Lachesis and her two sister Fates, see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.25-30) the lower faculties of the soul are once again in potential (rather than \softline
active) state.  The higher faculties of the rational soul, on the other hand, are immediately said to \softline
be }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 in atto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (in action, i.e., fully existing), and more vigorously so than when they were inhibited by \softline
the lower souls.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab There are three constitutive parts of the intellectual (or rational) soul according to St. \softline
Augustine (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De Trinitate}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.18, cited by Daniello [comm. to vv. 82-84]): 'The memory, the \softline
intellect, and the will are the components of a single mind.'  These seem to be the sources of \softline
Dante's formulation here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'afterlife' of a shade is compared to its taking the form of a rainbow when the \softline
soul 'imprints' itself upon the surrounding air to make itself reassemble the memory of its former \softline
body out of thin air.  It is as inseparable from the higher soul as a flame is from its fire.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  The conclusion of Statius's demonstration of the nature of a shade's aerial body \softline
relies, as readers since Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to vv. 103-106) have realized, on Virgil's \softline
description of the condition of the souls in his afterworld (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.730-751).  Among the details \softline
found there are the smiles and tears of which Dante speaks here (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.733 and Dante's vv. \softline
103-104).  See also Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 103-105).  For a more recent discussion see \softline
Baranski ("Canto XXV," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and \softline
Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), pp. 397-98.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tortura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (translated as 'circling') here perhaps has two meanings: 'turning' \softline
and 'torture,' thus describing both the spatial and the punitive aspects of the terrace: one makes a \softline
tighter circle there as one burns.  Perhaps no dispute in the commentaries comes closer to being a \softline
draw than this on.  The Ottimo (comm. to vv. 85-114) would seem to believe that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tortura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has \softline
both meanings; Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 109-111) believes it means 'turning'; Francesco da Buti \softline
(comm. to vv. 109-120) believes it means 'torture.'  Over the years roughly half of those who have \softline
entered the fray believe it means 'turning.'  Andreoli (comm. to this verse) was the first to suggest \softline
(citing the Accademia della Crusca) that the second meaning only entered the language later, an \softline
argument that was only answered a quarter millenium later by Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 109-111), who point out that it did exist with the second significance in one of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Laude}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Iacopone \softline
da Todi (ed. Mancini, 67, verse 15).  In short, an interpreter is free to choose either alternative; a \softline
translator is forced to decide on one.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Some readers have difficulty visualizing what Dante here describes.  Flames \softline
shoot out from the wall of the cliff, at first horizontally, but then driven back and up by a wind \softline
moving sharply upward from below at the edge of the terrace, thus making the flames move up \softline
and past the face of the wall and freeing a narrow path that is flame-free at the outer edge of the \softline
terrace.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The hymn sung by the penitents of Lust has caused some confusion in the modern \softline
age because the hymn }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Summae Deus clementiae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ('God of supreme clemency') does not seem \softline
appropriate to the recriminations of the lustful, while the hymn }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Summae Parens clementiae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  does.  \softline
However, the early commentators knew this hymn by the same first line as we today know the \softline
former.  Its text, in a form that is probably close to or identical with that known by Dante, is \softline
found in the commentary of Jacopo della Lana (comm. to vv. 121-124).  The third stanza hopes \softline
for God's annealing fire to combat the passion of lust.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 128.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'I know no man.'  These are part of Mary's words in answer to the angel's \softline
announcement (Luke 1.34) that she will bear a child: 'How shall this be, since I know no man?'  \softline
This is Mary's seventh appearance on the mountain as the primary exemplar of a virtue opposing \softline
the relevant vice.  Edward Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Second Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1899)]), pp. 63 and 194, suggests that Dante may have derived his \softline
idea of having Mary represent the 'antidote' to each of the seven sins from St. Bonaventure \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Speculum Beatae Mariae Virginis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The second exemplar of Chastity is Diana, her story drawn from Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
II.401-530), the tale of the wood nymph Helice (Callisto), who paid for Jupiter's seduction and 
impregnation of her when, at the request of outraged Juno, Diana banished her from her \softline
woodlands.  She was turned into a bear by Juno, and then, by the now more kind Jupiter, into the \softline
constellation Ursa Major.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Pertile ("Quale amore va in Paradiso?" in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 "Le donne, i cavalieri, l'arme, gli \softline
amori": Poema e romanzo: la narrativa lunga in Italia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Francesco Bruni (Venice: Marsilio, \softline
2001)), p. 62, for discomfort with Dante's unique use of anonymous exemplars here.  Porena \softline
(comm. to these verses) was perhaps the first commentator to give voice to a similar disquiet \softline
(Bosco/Reggio [comm. to vv. 109-139] do also), suggesting that we expect a third example \softline
drawn from the Judeo-Christian tradition but receive instead exemplars that Bosco rightly \softline
characterizes as being 'indeterminate' and 'impersonal.'  John S. Carroll (comm. to these verses), \softline
while not dealing with this anomaly directly, may have found a reason for Dante's decision in a \softline
desire to champion the importance of marriage and the acceptability, indeed the desirability, of \softline
sexual concourse among husbands and wives.  In this formulation Dante resorts to anonymity for \softline
his married couples in order to justify sexual pleasure for all who are married, in covert polemic \softline
against such overly zealous clerics as those who called for even marital abstinence.  Scartazzini \softline
(comm. to vv. 133-134) correctly rebukes Benvenuto (comm. to these verses) and Francesco da \softline
Buti (comm. to vv. 133-139) for misreading the text and making the wives guilty of sexual \softline
misconduct while their husbands were chaste.  It is clear that the penitents are praising the \softline
chastely married of both sexes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 138-139.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 piaga}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (wound) is used here, as it was used at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.38 \softline
for Bonagiunta and his companions, to refer to the 'wound' of sin.  Does it also refer to the letter \softline
P incised on them?  Those who believe that all the penitents on the mountain bear this sign would \softline
naturally believe so (see the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.112,  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.22-24, and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.1-6).  On \softline
the other hand, if only Dante bears this letter on his forehead, the reference would be to the inner \softline
wound of sin, as would seem more natural, and as Portirelli (comm. to vv. 121-139) believed, \softline
arguing that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (treatment) represented the external application of fire and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pasti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (diet), the \softline
internal process of reflection upon the exemplars of the chaste life.\par
}}