{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 21}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   From at least the time of Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 1-3), commentators dealing with \softline
this opening verse have cited the opening (and other passages) of Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.i.1): 'As the \softline
Philosopher [Aristotle] says in the beginning of the First Philosophy [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metaphysics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.i], all of \softline
humankind naturally desires to know.'  Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 1-6), however, make an \softline
important distinction.  Since here the protagonist is presented with a miracle, the moment in \softline
which a soul is finally prepared to rise to God, the following reference (vv. 2-3) to the waters of \softline
eternal life in the episode in John's gospel 'confirms the notion that the natural desire for \softline
knowledge cannot be satisfied except by Revelation, thus going beyond the affirmations found in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.i.1; I.i.9; III.xv.4) normally cited by the commentators, which are limited to \softline
philosophical knowledge.'  It is interesting to note that Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to vv. 1-3) cites the beginning of Aristotle's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metaphysics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to make a highly similar point, separating \softline
Aristotelian }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scientia mundana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (knowledge of this world) from experience of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 divina gratia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (divine \softline
grace).  On the distance between the formulations found in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and those presented here, \softline
see also Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1969]), pp. 68-69.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 2-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The obvious reference to the passage in John's gospel (4:5-15) has not escaped many \softline
readers.  The Samaritan woman who finds Jesus, unprepared for the task of drawing water, at her \softline
well, ends up being eager to taste the 'water' that he offers as replacement for that which seems so \softline
necessary at noon of a warm day in the desert, for it 'fiet in eo fons aquae }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 salientis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in vitam \softline
aeternam' ([italics added] shall become in him a fountain of water springing up into life \softline
everlasting).  In the Vulgate the present participle }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 salientis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  may refer to the water or indeed to the \softline
drinker, rising up into eternal life.  It is worth keeping this potential grammatical ambiguity in \softline
mind, for that second reading applies precisely to the condition of Statius, who has just now come \softline
to that moment in his posthumous existence: he is ready to take on the life of a soul in paradise; \softline
he himself is ready to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 salire}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (rise up).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Strangely enough, there is dispute among the commentators as to the metaphoric nature of \softline
the water offered by Jesus.  For the first quarter millennium all who dealt with this question \softline
offered the obvious interpretation: divine grace.  Then in the nineteenth century, beginning with \softline
Portirelli (comm. to vv. 1-6), some interpreters were of the opinion that the water referred either \softline
to human knowledge of God or to that knowledge possessed alone by God.  Another group, the \softline
first of them Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 1-3), thought that it signified 'truth,' although exactly \softline
which kind varied, from Porena's (comm. to vv. 1-6) sense that for Dante it meant truth in general \softline
to Giacalone's (comm. to vv. 1-6) view that it means the truth found in Revelation alone.  Surely \softline
the early commentators were correct.  The water that the Samaritan woman asks for is that of \softline
eternal life, which comes alone from the grace of God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As some commentators have pointed out, John's word for the Samaritan is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mulier}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(woman), while Dante has used a diminutive (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 femminetta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Giacalone (comm. to vv. 1-6) thinks \softline
of the form more as a 'commiserative' than as a 'diminutive,' i.e., we are to think of this woman's \softline
absolute ordinariness as an encouragement to our own need for exactly such satisfaction of our \softline
'thirst.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante has rarely portrayed his protagonist as being beset by so many distractions.  
He desperately wants to understand the meaning both of the earthquake and of the song \softline
accompanying it; he and Virgil are trying to move ahead as quickly as possible, picking their way \softline
among the clutter of the penitents; he continues to feel a sense of grief at their punishment, \softline
despite its obvious rightness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Announced with its solemn biblical stylistic flourish (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ed ecco}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [And lo]), the \softline
reminiscence of Luke 24:13-16 (a passage that begins 'Et ecce') reminds the reader of two of \softline
Christ's disciples (Dante's first commentators at times incorrectly identify them as James and John; \softline
it is clear that one of the two is named Cleopas [24:18], while the other is perhaps his wife \softline
[24:29], in which case she may well have been known as Mary [John 19:25]), walking on the road \softline
to Emmaus when Christ joined them and walked with them, unrecognized.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-14.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius's unmistakable resemblance to Christ risen, his figural relation to Jesus, \softline
makes him, technically, not a 'figure' of Christ but a 'fulfillment' of Him, which is theologically \softline
awkward.  Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, \softline
1969]), pp. 67-70, argues for the technical reference of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ombra}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (shade) here, grounded in \softline
the language of the Christian interpretation of Scripture, discovered, indeed, in this very chapter \softline
of Luke's gospel (24:27), when Jesus teaches his disciples the figural method of understanding the \softline
Old Testament.  (See Heilbronn ["The Prophetic Role of Statius in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  95 [1977], p. 58, for a similar view.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab How, some commentators have asked, perhaps beginning with Manfredi Porena (comm. \softline
to vv. 7-13), could Dante and Virgil }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 see}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that Statius was behind them?  They could not.  Now, \softline
narrating the scene, the poet, knowing that Statius came up from behind, says that he did so.  \softline
They first became aware of him when he spoke -- at which point, as the text says, they turned \softline
around.  As the risen Christ walked along beside Cleopas and his wife, who did not recognize \softline
him, so does the 'resurrected' Statius walk up behind Dante and Virgil, who do not at first know \softline
that he is there.  In both scenes it is also true that 'the two who were on the way' do not know \softline
with whom they converse until much later (see Luke 24:35, when they break bread with their \softline
'new' acquaintance in their home; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.91, when this soul's identity is finally made plain).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Another problem here is caused by the grammatical ambiguity of the phrase 'guardando la \softline
turba che giace': who is doing the looking, Statius or Dante and Virgil?  Grammatically both are \softline
possible.  Both proximity and common sense move a reader to the latter possibility: Dante and \softline
Virgil, the 'noi' that is closer to the gerund than Statius's 'ombra,' are looking down at the shades, \softline
as we know (from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.143, where they are also 'guardando'; XXI.6).  Statius, having just \softline
come from lying prostrate, is more likely to be looking ahead and above, where he is finally \softline
allowed to direct himself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the present tense of the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giace}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , problematic in whatever solution one proposes for \softline
the last question, see the note to vv. 22-24.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Statius's first words join him to the tradition of fraternal purgatorial greeting on the part of \softline
the penitents we have so far heard addressing Dante: Belacqua (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.127); Oderisi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XI.82); Sapia (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.94); Marco (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.65); Adrian (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.133).  See notes to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.127 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.133.  For a complete listing of all uses of 'frate' as form of address in \softline
the last two }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.127.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Singleton's dependence on Sinclair's translation of this passage is betrayed by his comment \softline
(comm. to vv. 10-13), which has Statius looking at the crowd of penitents at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  feet, while the 
translation has Dante and Virgil doing the looking.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the source of Statius's greeting, see the words of Christ to his apostles, the second \softline
scene of his resurrected life on earth in Luke's gospel (Luke 24:36): 'Pax vobis: ego sum, nolite \softline
timere' (Peace unto you: I am, have no fear).  In the next verse of Luke the apostles indeed do \softline
show fear; and we may remember how fearful Dante was when the earth shook beneath him at the \softline
end of the last canto (vv. 128-129; 135).  William Stephany ("Biblical Allusions to Conversion in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1983]), pp. 161-62, sees a connection with biblical \softline
moments (in the narratives involving Cleopas and the Samaritan woman) in which 'characters are \softline
frightened either by Jesus' birth or rebirth.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 14-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The nature of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cenno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (sign) made in response by Virgil has long puzzled the \softline
commentators.  We can say one thing with something like certainty: Virgil's gesture is not a \softline
spoken one, since he makes some sort of gesture and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 then}{\plain \fs24 \f1  begins to speak (verse 16).  Many early \softline
and some later commentators have liked the idea that in response Virgil said 'et cum spiritu tuo' \softline
(and with your spirit as well), a liturgical reply.  Yet it surely seems impossible that Dante would \softline
have first presented Virgil as speaking and then immediately afterwards as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 beginning to speak}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  \softline
And so it is clearly preferable to understand that Virgil made some sort of physical gesture.  \softline
Perhaps the most sensible gloss remains that of Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 14-18): 'with similar \softline
reverence [Virgil] lowered his head to him.'  Previously Dante has clearly distinguished among \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 parole}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mani}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cenni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (words, [actions of] hands, and signs) at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.50; and he will \softline
distinguish between }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dir}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cenno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (speech and sign) at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.139.  In fact, in the \softline
fifteen uses of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cenno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the poem, this would be the only one in which it referred to \softline
speech, as Steiner (comm. to verse 15) points out, adding that Virgil, as a pagan inhabitant of \softline
Limbo, is never permitted either to pronounce sacred phrases or to perform actions pertaining to \softline
Christian ritual (e.g., genuflexion).  The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cenno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  appears frequently in the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.117, \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.98, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.5, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI.116, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.138, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.8, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.50, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.141, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XII.129, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.86, here, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.27, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.139; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.71, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.101).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the ingenious but perhaps not eventually acceptable notion that Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cenno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  'may \softline
very well be an embrace, a gesture analogous to the liturgical Kiss of Peace' see Heilbronn ("The \softline
Prophetic Role of Statius in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  95 [1977]), pp. 58-65.  Had Virgil \softline
been a Christian, Dante might very well have chosen to make Heilbronn right.  However, see \softline
James Albrecht ("'Il cenno ch'a ci{\f3 \'62} si conface' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  21.15]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Electronic Bulletin of the \softline
Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [February 2002]), who argues that Virgil's gesture is the sign of the \softline
cross, offered without the accompanying response to the hopeful wish 'Dominus det nobis suam \softline
pacem' (May God grant us His peace) found in breviaries and in the liturgy of the hours: 'Et vitam \softline
eternam' (And eternal life); in Albrecht's view it is what Virgil }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 did not say}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that is focal to the \softline
scene.  (For clear examples of facial gestures as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cenni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in this very canto, see verse 104, Virgil's \softline
look that calls for silence and verse 109, Dante's smile that is a hint.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's wish for Statius is touching, in part because it has been accomplished, \softline
since Statius is already substantially one of the blessed, only awaiting a change in his accidental \softline
state, which will be accomplished in less than a day.  While the poem does not show him there, its \softline
givens make it plain that, had Dante chosen to do so, Statius could have been observed seated in \softline
the rose in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII; he is there by the time Dante ascends into the heavens at the \softline
beginning of the next }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or so we may assume.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab Virgil's insistence on his own eternal home is a moving reminder of his tragic situation in \softline
this comic poem.  Statius's salvation comes closer than anyone else's in showing how near Virgil \softline
himself came to eternal blessedness, as the next canto will make clear.  And, once we learn (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXII.67-73) that it was Virgil who was responsible, by means of his fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , for the \softline
conversion of Statius, we consider these lines with a still more troubled heart.  For remarks in a \softline
similar vein see Stephany ("Biblical Allusions to Conversion in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford Italian \softline
Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1983]), p. 158n.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For Statius's miscomprehension of Dante's condition, see the note to the next \softline
tercet.  The physical reason for it is that, because the travelers are out of the sun's rays on the far \softline
side of the mountain, Dante's body casts no revealing shadow, and Statius takes Virgil's \softline
confession of his own plight to apply to both of these 'shades.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 parte}{\plain \fs24 \f1  used here and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.16 as an adverb, a Florentine provincialism, \softline
meaning 'meanwhile,' see Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Contributions to the Textual Criticism of the "Divina \softline
Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1889]), pp. 398-99, citing Benvenuto as \softline
previously making the same point in both instances.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's remarks suggest to Statius that the (remaining three) P's on Dante's \softline
forehead indicate a special status, namely that he is bound for Glory -- just as is Statius.  But did \softline
Statius have these marks incised on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  forehead?  Had he, they would now all be erased but for \softline
this last, which would probably disappear, along with Dante's, before the beginning of the next \softline
canto (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.3, where we learn the angel has wiped Dante's fifth P from his brow).  He \softline
would have spent, we will be able to compute from information gleaned from verse 68 and from \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.92-93, as many as 300 years in ante-purgatory and/or on some or all of the first \softline
three terraces, since it is 1204 years since his death in the year 96 and he has had to remain over \softline
400 years on the fourth terrace and over 500 on this one.  Thus, had he borne signs on his \softline
forehead, these would originally have been as many as five and as few as two.  However, there is \softline
no reason to believe that he, or any other penitent not here in the flesh, has had his brow incised \softline
with P's.  (See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.112.)  For other reasons to believe that only Dante is incised, \softline
see Hollander ("The Letters on Dante's Brow [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . 9.112 and 21.22-24]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Electronic Bulletin of \softline
the Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [January 2002]); for an opposing view see Nicola Fosca \softline
("Beatitudini e processo di purgazione," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Electronic Bulletin of the Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[February 2002]).  And for an attempt to deal with the problem raised by the present tense of the \softline
verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 profila}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as indicating that the warder habitually inscribes the P's on sinners, see, again, \softline
Hollander's note in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 EBDSA}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , where he argues, following a suggestion offered by Chimenz \softline
(comm. to vv. 22-24), that this present has the significance of a past and that we should \softline
understand that only Dante is to be understood as having had his forehead incised.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The circumlocution describes Lachesis, the second of the three Fates of classical \softline
mythology.  'At the birth of every mortal, Clotho, the spinning fate, was supposed to wind upon \softline
the distaff of Lachesis, the alotting fate, a certain amount of yarn; the duration of the life of the \softline
individual being the length of time occupied in spinning the thread, which, when complete, was \softline
severed by Atropos, the inevitable fate' (Toynbee, "Laches{\f3 \'58}s" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  For \softline
Atropos, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.126.  This is Virgil's long-winded way of saying that Dante was still 
in the body when he was summoned to guide him through the afterworld.  For Dante's likely \softline
dependence upon Statius for the names of the three Fates, see Ettore Paratore, "Stazio" \softline
(ED.1976.5), pp. 422b-423a.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   What exactly Virgil means by his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (teaching of Dante) has been a matter of some \softline
debate, featuring predictable allegorizations, e.g., Virgil as reason, Statius as moral philosophy, \softline
Beatrice as theology.  None of these has the merit of being immediately (or eventually?) \softline
convincing.  The last time we have heard the word was at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.94, where the poet referred \softline
to the group of poets (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 la bella scola}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) headed by Homer, and perhaps, 'reading Dante by Dante,' \softline
we should keep this simplest explanation in clear view.  Virgil, informed by all that a pagan poet \softline
can know, will guide Dante as best he can.  Once we reach the question of the nature of the \softline
human soul, in Canto XXV, he will give way to Statius, who, as a Christian, understands things \softline
about the nature of the human soul's relationship to divinity of which Virgil is simply ignorant.  \softline
There is no reason to believe, one might add, that Beatrice could not have instructed Dante about \softline
this question, or that Statius could not have told him anything that Beatrice will reveal in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  All saved Christians, in this poem, are capable of knowing all things in God.  The \softline
rewards of Heaven are not only affective, but intellectual.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab We should also be aware of Beatrice's use of the same word, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scola}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXXIII.85 to denigrate Dante's own nearly disastrous adventures in what she seems to consider \softline
his overbold philosophizing.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   At last Virgil asks Statius the two questions that have so vexed Dante; for a third \softline
time the importance of the salvation of Statius is underlined.  See notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX.145-151 and to vv. 4-6 of this canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius first establishes the meteorology of the mountain.  There is no 'weather' \softline
encountered above the upper limit of ante-purgatory, but below that limit there is.  Up here the \softline
only celestial force having any effect is the direct influence of the heavens.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Thaumas's daughter is Iris, for classical poets the personification of the rainbow, appearing \softline
variously above the earth and not in one fixed place.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The wind hidden inside the earth (verse 56, first referred to as 'dry vapor' in verse 52) \softline
refers to what Dante, in keeping with one medieval view (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.130-136), believed to be the \softline
cause of earthquakes.  Statius's point is that there are no natural earthquakes on the upper reaches \softline
of the mountain, but that there are 'supernatural' ones.  This one, accompanying the completion of \softline
Statius's penance and marking his liberation from sin, may remind us of the earthquake that \softline
greeted Dante's 'supernatural' descent into the underworld at the conclusion of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III, itself \softline
perhaps also meant to remind the reader of the earthquake at the Crucifixion (referred to at some \softline
length by Virgil in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.31-45).  These three earthquakes, all caused by Christ-centered \softline
spiritual events, would clearly seem to be related.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The self-judging quality of the penitents is here made plain.  We saw the same \softline
phenomenon among the damned in the confessions that they offered to Minos (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
V.8).  \ul0 \tab Words for 'will' and 'willing' occur five times in nine lines (61-69), the densest block of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 volere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 volont{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  found in the poem.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III the examples of Piccarda and Costanza \softline
will afford the opportunity to study the divergence between the absolute will, always striving 
toward the good, and the conditional (i.e., 'conditioned') will, which, when guided by desires for \softline
lesser goods, chooses unwisely.  Here Dante plays the changes on that basic understanding of the \softline
will's role.  In purgatory the conditional will does not elect the lesser good, but instead desires to \softline
repent its former movement in that direction.  This is a 'rule' of purgatory that has no precedent in \softline
Christian lore, since Dante's purgatory is so much his own invention; nonetheless, it makes \softline
intuitive sense.  It is thus that the poet suggests that his reader understand why a penitent, while \softline
naturally desiring to cease the act of penance, simultaneously feels a still stronger and countering \softline
desire to complete it, as is made clear here.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a soul to 'change its convent,' in this context, means for it to move from purgatory to \softline
paradise.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab A sharp distinction between (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 talento}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) desire and will (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 voglia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) in verse 61 is drawn by \softline
Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Contributions to the Textual Criticism of the "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: \softline
Cambridge University Press, 1889]), pp. 401-4, demonstrating that the early commentators saw \softline
clearly that desire represents the conditional will (as it did in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.39, where the desire of the \softline
lustful is described as running counter to reason), while the will referred to here is the absolute \softline
will, which always seeks the good alone.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   His use of the first person here is the first instance of an autobiographical bent on \softline
the speaker's part, but his self-identification still awaits.  He only now formally concludes his \softline
response to Dante's insistent and paired questions, first alluded to in the last canto (XX.145-151); \softline
in a gesture typical of purgatorial brotherhood, his next thought is for his fellow penitents (cf. \softline
Virgil's similar wish at vv. 16-18).  (For Statius's various sins and the time spent purging them on \softline
the mountain, see notes to vv. 22-24 and to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.92-93.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   After telling us three times how eagerly he wanted to know more about these \softline
strange signs on the mountain (see the note to vv. 34-39), the poet now once again underlines \softline
their importance.  The singular importance of the salvation of Statius is insisted on in such a way \softline
as to let us understand that what matters is not only the importance of the finishing of purgation \softline
for any soul, but Statius's astounding role in Dante's poem, which will gradually become more \softline
clear as the two cantos devoted to him continue to unfold their mysteries.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Those who know it may remember an old joke with a similar rhythm.  An elderly man \softline
traveling on a train in a sleeping car awakens in the middle of the night and then awakens some of \softline
his fellow unseen sleepers as he cries out, 'Oh, am I thirsty; oh, am I thirsty!'  Finally, a disgruntled \softline
fellow traveler arises, gets a cup of water from the drinking fountain at the end of the car, and \softline
passes it in to the man in his curtained berth.  Shortly after the good Samaritan has returned to his \softline
own berth and is nodding back off to sleep, he is brought back to waking when the old man \softline
begins to cry out, 'Oh, was I thirsty; oh, was I thirsty!'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Tommaseo (comm. to these verses) rightly suggests that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 congaudere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (rejoice) is a \softline
biblical word; further precision was offered by Campi, citing I Corinthians 12:26: 'sive gloriatur \softline
unum membrum, congaudent omnia membra' (if a single member glories, then all members rejoice \softline
along with it).  St. Paul is developing the analogy between parts of the human body and the \softline
individual members of the mystical body of Christ, the Church.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's specific question at last elicits a sort of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vita poetae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  from his interlocutor.  See 
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.67-87 for the similar }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vita Virgilii}{\plain \fs24 \f1  found there. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Publius Papinius Statius (45-96) was born in Naples and not in Toulouse, \softline
birthplace of a different Statius, a rhetorician; Dante's error was a common one (perhaps deriving \softline
from the glosses by Lactantius [ca. 300] to the poems of Statius) and he helped propagate it, since \softline
he is probably responsible for the mistaken birthplace found both in Boccaccio and in Chaucer; for \softline
the former, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Amorosa visione}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.34 and, for the latter, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Hous of Fame}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.1460.  For the \softline
suggestion (which the commentator himself eventually questions) that Statius was actually from \softline
Telesa (or Telesia), a city (later destroyed) in the vicinity of Naples, and thus would have been \softline
correctly described as being 'telesano,' a form easily corrupted into 'tolosano,' see Lombardi \softline
(comm. to verse 89).  Statius's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , an epic in twelve books, composed in the years between \softline
between 80 and 92, was the source of a good deal of Dante's sense of what for us is the 'Oedipus \softline
story,' in Statius treated as the civil war between the forces loyal to one or the other of Oedipus's \softline
royal sons.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante's reference to Statius's laureation is problematic.  Since it seems clear, despite an \softline
occasional argument to the contrary, that Dante did not know Statius's collection of his 'fugitive' \softline
poems, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Silvae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see the note to verse 90), he could not have read (in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Silvae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.v.28-31) that, \softline
while the emperor (Domitian) had crowned Statius with gold at an 'arts festival' at Alba, he had \softline
not done so at Rome, i.e., Statius did not get the laurel for his epic.  And thus it remains possible \softline
but seems unlikely that he ever received the laurel; however, his dedication of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to \softline
Domitian, coupled with the opening lines of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Achilleid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.9-11), where he asks Apollo for \softline
laureation and intimates that he had been previously coronated, might have made Dante think he \softline
had been.  This second epic, which he did not finish, getting only as far as into the second book, \softline
was the source of most of what Dante, Homerless, knew about Achilles.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Born ca. A.D. 45, Statius was thus about twenty-five when Titus, son of the \softline
emperor Vespasian, destroyed in A.D. 70 the second temple in Jerusalem as part of his attack \softline
upon the Jews, an event to which Dante will advert in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.92 (for Dante's sense of the \softline
'just retribution' involved in this event, see the note to that passage).  Titus succeeded Vespasian \softline
as emperor (79-81).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'name' to which the speaker refers is that of poet.  The surprising, even \softline
shocking, culmination of his statement of his debt to Virgil in the next canto (verse 73: 'through \softline
you I was a poet, through you a Christian') is adumbrated here, where Statius owns himself (at the \softline
age at which Dante suffered the loss of Beatrice, twenty-five) to have achieved fame as a poet but \softline
not yet faith in Christ.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante had already referred to Statius as 'lo dolce poeta' (the sweet poet) at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
IV.xxv.6, as Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 88-90) pointed out.  Pietro di Dante (Pietrro1, comm. to \softline
vv. 82-90) was the first to suggest that the source for the phrase lay in Juvenal's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Satires}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VII.82-87).  For strong support of this notion, see Alessandro Ronconi ("L'incontro di Stazio e Virgilio," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cultura e scuola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13-14 [1965]), pp. 568-69; see also Vincenzo Tandoi ("Il ricordo di Stazio \softline
'dolce poeta' nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sat}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII di Giovenale," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Maia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  21 [1969], pp. 103-22).  Ettore Paratore, \softline
"Giovenale" (ED.1971.3), pp. 197-202, offers probably the most balanced and useful introduction \softline
to the problem of Dante's knowledge of Juvenal.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   There has been much confusion over the meaning of Statius's reference to being \softline
crowned with myrtle leaves.  The myrtle tree was sacred to Venus (see, e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.72).  And, \softline
indeed, Statius himself, in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Silvae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.vii.10-11), asks to be crowned as a lyric poet (and not as \softline
a writer of epic) with myrtle leaves.  However, as nearly all admit, or even insist, Dante could not \softline
have been acquainted with the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Silvae}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a manuscript of which was only discovered in the fifteenth \softline
century by Poggio Bracciolini in France, copied and brought back into Italy, where Poliziano \softline
would take much pleasure and instruction from it.  Then what does Dante mean us to understand \softline
by Statius's insistence that he was crowned with myrtle?  As Daniello (comm. to vv. 88-90) notes, \softline
Virgil speaks of both laurel and myrtle (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Egl}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.54): 'You, too, o laurels (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lauri}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), I will pluck, and \softline
you, neighboring myrtle (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 myrte}{\plain \fs24 \f1 )'; Daniello believes that Statius is associated with myrtle because \softline
he was a poet of love.  Disagreeing with him, Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 88-90) thinks that the \softline
phrase, for Dante, meant that the myrtle wreath was secondary to the laurel, an opinion followed \softline
by Porena and developed by Mattalia (both commenting upon this verse); Mattalia argues that, \softline
while Dante himself makes Statius one of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 poete regolati}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (i.e., the classical Latin poets worthy \softline
of emulation [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dve}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.vi.7]), it is Statius who speaks now, and he wants to show his awareness of \softline
his dependence upon Virgil, of his role as secondary poet following in the wake of a master.  See \softline
verses two lines from the ending of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (XII.816-817), which explicitly make a highly \softline
similar claim: 'do not attempt to rival the divine }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , but follow at a distance, always \softline
worshiping its footsteps.'  Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Scripture and Classical Authors \softline
in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 (1896)]), p. 243, was perhaps the first to suggest that this \softline
passage was being cited here in vv. 94-97.  For its possible earlier relevance, see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.145-148.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius's 'second burden' was his unfinished }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Achilleid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the relationship of Statius's text to these lines, see the concluding remarks in \softline
the note to verse 90.  The image of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as being the divine torch that has set aflame many \softline
another poem, including this one, similarly 'divine,' if surely in different ways, will be explored as \softline
this scene unfolds.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1    The appearance of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mamma}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here is stunning, for we find it, a spectacular \softline
instantiation of the low vernacular (see the last item in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.1-9, the passage in \softline
which it has had its only previous appearance), used in the same verse with the word that may \softline
have represented for Dante the height of classical eloquence, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ene{\f3 \'56}da}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the title of the greatest \softline
classical poem, here in its only use in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The passage applies to Statius, but increasingly students of this passage have been \softline
convinced that Statius's fictive biography serves as a sort of stand-in for Dante's genuine one, that \softline
is, in Statius's words here about his dependence on Virgil we are also reading Dante's confession \softline
of his own debt to the Roman poet.  For this view see, among others, Ettore Paratore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tradizione \softline
e struttura in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1968]), pp. 72-73; Padoan ({\u8220\'93}Il Canto XXI del \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le Monnier, 1970]), p. 354; \softline
Hollander ("Babytalk in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1980]), \softline
pp. 123-24, 205n.; Stephany ("Biblical Allusions to Conversion in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford \softline
Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1983]), p. 151; Picone }{\plain \fs24 \f1 ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy," \softline
Introductory Readings II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, 
supplement, Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1993]), p. 330.  In the next canto the extent of \softline
that debt will assume staggering proportions.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In a reversal of our usual expectation, the high style of classical tragic writing is portrayed \softline
as serving as mother and nurse, giving suck to the infant vernacular, triumphantly low.  This is a \softline
far cry from the program of Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which sought to champion the lofty, \softline
tragic vernacular poetry of Italy, with Dante's own }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzoni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (odes) as the crowning example.  In \softline
the earlier work the Italian initiate was urged to learn how to write in the high style by imitating \softline
the classical poets; now we find that the lofty bards of antiquity become 'mothers' of a quite \softline
different sort of poetry, the low, or comic, style of this theological epic.  For a discussion of the \softline
word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mamma}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in Dante see Hollander ("Babytalk in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Ravenna: Longo, 1980]), pp. 120-29.  And for a quite different treatment of the image of being \softline
suckled at the breast see Gary Cestaro ("The Primal Scene of Suckling in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari \softline
eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  109 [1991], pp. 119-47).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab A dram is the equivalent of one-eighth of an ounce.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   While some have understood that Statius's gesture offers a single day of \softline
lingering (first, the Anonimus Lombardus [comm. to these verses]) and others a solar cycle of \softline
twenty-eight years (first, Jacopo della Lana [comm. to verse 101]), most, after the Ottimo (comm. \softline
to vv. 94-102), believe that he means one more year.  We might be tempted to reflect that, if he \softline
had met Virgil after he had converted, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 he}{\plain \fs24 \f1  might have returned a favor and converted Virgil to \softline
Christianity (one can imagine their conversation about the real meaning of the fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  \softline
The context here, involving only his poetic debt to Virgil, probably should put that thought from \softline
us.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first of these two adjacent and charming passages to return to earlier \softline
moments in the canto adverts to the discussion of the absolute and conditional wills in vv. 61-69.  \softline
Here we see that Dante's absolute will is conquered by his emotions.  In the second, Dante's smile \softline
is probably to be understood as exactly such a sign as Virgil gave to arriving Statius at vv. 14-15.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab One does not want to read in too moralizing a light this extraordinary little scene.  There is \softline
no serious consequence if Dante gives away Virgil's little secret, or if Statius becomes over-enthusiastic once it is known.  The three poets share a moment of common freedom from the \softline
constraints of their missions.  It is typical of this great and securely serious theological poet that \softline
he can indulge himself and his readers in moments of such moving happiness.  This is perhaps as \softline
close to experiencing Christian fellowship as Virgil ever comes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 125-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist's understanding of Statius's debt to Virgil is obviously not yet \softline
fully developed.  In his formulation it was from the greater poet that Statius learned 'to sing of \softline
men and of the gods,' an adequate description of the work of a pagan writer of epic.  We will \softline
learn in the next canto that, behind the fa{\f2\u231\'e7}ade of pagan trappings, Statius was in fact a secret \softline
Christian.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.67-73.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-136.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the view that Statius is behaving passionally when it were better not to, see \softline
Denise Heilbronn ("'Io pur sorrisi': Dante's Lesson on the Passions [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI, 94-136]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  96 [1978], pp. 67-74).  Stephany's rejoinder ("Biblical Allusions to Conversion in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1983]), pp. 142-43, is less than convincing.  He 
finds it odd that Statius, having finished his purgation, should return to so much lower a level of \softline
response.  In his view, Virgil is imitating Christ when he asks Mary Magdalen not to touch Him \softline
('noli me tangere' -- John 20:17).  Stephany's discussion of that passage and its relationship to the \softline
two other major biblical resonances in this canto, those of the Samaritan woman and of the \softline
disciples on the road to Emmaus encountering the resurrected Jesus, as all being narratives that \softline
concern conversion, is close to Dante's text and telling.  However, the tone of the episode clearly \softline
responds far more to Heilbronn's sense, if perhaps less sternly than she might have us believe.  The \softline
scene is amusing and utterly human; Statius has for a moment re-entered his previous life, as even \softline
other saints might do, in the presence of Virgil.  And even the protagonist, caught between the \softline
differing desires of the two classical poets, is apparently momentarily exempt from moral \softline
pressures.  How might the saved Stephany respond, completing his purgation, finding himself in \softline
the presence of Dante?  The poet's view of the completion of purgation, reflected in the \softline
protagonist's own 'free time' as he enters Eden, is not completely dissimilar to what we found in \softline
ante-purgatory, where the pressure on the souls is also less acute.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab With regard to the supposed 'failed embrace' between Statius and Virgil, Hollander has \softline
argued ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: Cato's Rebuke and Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scoglio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  52 [1975]), p.359, that \softline
Dante's failed attempt to embrace Casella (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.76-81), pointing to a physical impossibility, is \softline
countered in the successful exchange of embraces between Sordello and Virgil, both shades \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.2, 15).  In both of those scenes there is a desire to embrace that is either frustrated or \softline
accomplished.  Here Statius desires to embrace Virgil but, once advised against doing so by the \softline
author of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , wills not to.  Since we know from Sordello's and Virgil's shared embraces \softline
that in fact shades are capable of embracing, we may not properly say, as most who deal with the \softline
scene do, that Virgil and Statius, 'being shades, cannot embrace,' or that they 'are not capable of \softline
embracing' (Giovanni Cecchetti ["The Statius Episode: Observations on Dante's Conception of \softline
Poetry," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1  7 (1990)], p. 107).  They are perfectly capable of embracing; \softline
Virgil convinces Statius that it is not a fitting gesture in this higher realm.  For another view of the \softline
supposedly problematic program of embraces see Nicolae Iliescu ("Gli episodi degli abbracci nelle \softline
strutture del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Yearbook of Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1 [1971], pp. 53-63).  And see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.134-135 for the probable biblical source of a similar scene: Pope Adrian's refusal \softline
to accept Dante's obeisance.  In the end Statius won't embrace Virgil because up here souls don't \softline
behave 'that way,' just as Virgil did not want to have his identity revealed for a similar reason.\par
}}