{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 11}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As Singleton points out in his gloss (comm. to vv. 1-21), this is the only complete \softline
prayer recited in the entire poem.  And, as Bosco/Reggio point out (comm. to these lines) the \softline
three forms of expiation that are found on every terrace are prayer, suffering, and meditation \softline
(upon examples of their vice's opposing virtue and the vice itself).  In this way the penitents \softline
attempt to accomplish their 'satisfaction' (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.70-72) before God for each \softline
particular offense into which they have fallen.  (It will eventually become clear [e.g., at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXIII.90] that not every sinner must purge every sin, although it is certainly possible that any \softline
given sinner would have sinned not only intrinsically but in fact in all seven categories.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante's version of the Lord's Prayer (Matthew 6:9-13; Luke 11:2-4) is, as examination of \softline
the Vulgate reveals, an amalgam of the two passages, adapted so as to be particularly fit for the \softline
souls of those who are in essence saved but needful of purgation (as is made clear by vv. 22-24).  \softline
It is clear that Dante is siding with those who have been involved in the vernacularization of the \softline
Bible, an activity fraught with danger in the late middle ages and early Renaissance.  It is perhaps \softline
not coincidental that the prayer is composed of seven sentences in Matthew (six in Luke) to match \softline
the seven tercets devoted to its longer paraphrase in Dante.  (The questions of the text of the \softline
Bible known to Dante and of his access to that text remain vital -- and unanswered [see Angelo \softline
Penna, 'Bibbia' (ED.1970.1), pp. 626-27].)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Giacalone (comm. to these verses) was perhaps the first Italian glossator to point out \softline
that Dante's phrasing here ('laudato sia' [let your name be praised]... 'da ogne creatura' [by every \softline
creature]) is not a translation from the Gospels but rather reflects the refrain of Francis of Assisi's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Laudes creaturarum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Karlheinz Stierle ("Canto XI," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), p. 159, cites Hermann \softline
Gmelin's commentary to this tercet (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Kommentar: der L{\f2\u228\'e4}uterungsberg}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Stuttgart: Klett, 1955]) for \softline
'Laudato sie, mi' Signore, con tucte le tue creature' as reason for Dante's deformation of the \softline
Beatitude here.  Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 2-6 and 4-6) also point this out with some \softline
insistence, apparently unaware of Gmelin's or Giacalone's earlier observations.  For possible \softline
earlier citations by Dante of Francis's poem see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.26-27.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab There is debate as to whether or not the Father is addressed as the Trinity or as Himself.  \softline
Those who take the former position have apparent support in the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vapore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (breath), which is \softline
often the sign of the Holy Spirit.  Here, as some commentators, beginning with Lombardi (comm. \softline
to verse 6) believe, Dante is thinking along the lines found in Wisdom (Sap. 7:25) where wisdom \softline
is described as 'vapor... virtutis Dei' (aura of the power of God).  Since the prayer is, indeed, the \softline
Paternoster, it is only natural that it be addressed to the Father, with whatever (inevitable) \softline
trinitarian overtones.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 11.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   According to St. Augustine (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De doctrina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.xi), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 osanna}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and other Hebrew words of \softline
exclamation are never translated in the Latin Bible.  (See Isidore of Seville on the untranslatability \softline
of interjections in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.21.)  This is the Hebrew word, used for a cry of joyful \softline
praise, most present in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , found a total of seven times (here and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.51; \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.1; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.29; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII.94 [in a verbal form]; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII.118; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXXII.135).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cotidiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a hapax, is clearly drawn from Luke (11:3): 'panem nostrum \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 quotidianum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' (our daily bread), and not from Matthew (6:11), where our bread is \softline
'supersubstantialem' rather than 'quotidianum.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We have heard (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.58-60) that even souls in grace are capable of going \softline
downward and, while knowing that they will not as a result be 'unsaved,' nonetheless simply do \softline
not wish to move in a retrograde direction.  Here the penitents of pride express a similar desire.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This last part of the adaptation is sung on behalf of earthly sinners, since those \softline
already on the mountain can no longer be overcome by Satan, as their earthly brethren all too \softline
easily are.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is fair to say that no one is certain what the root of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ramogna}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (translated \softline
here as 'safe haven') is or what it really means; see Manfredi Porena, "La parola pi{\f3 \'6a} misteriosa \softline
della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divina Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Atti della Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Rendiconti, Classe di \softline
scienze morali, storiche e filologiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ser. 8, 1 (1946 [1947]), pp. 387-95, and Francesco Vagni's \softline
entry for the word (ED.1973.4, pp. 848-49).  The early commentators mainly believed it meant a \softline
good journey, but on what authority one does not know.  A plurality of modern commentators \softline
believe it means 'good wishes,' but it seems strange to argue that the souls are praying for good \softline
wishes, for that would come close to being a mere tautology.  Our translation offers a variant of \softline
the earlier understanding.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The brief comparison equates the rocks carried by the penitents and our dreams of the \softline
incubus.  The text of the Codice Cassinese (comm. to this verse) gives a passage in Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XII.908-12) as offering an example of dreaming of suffocation under an enormous weight.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The souls are 'unequally distressed' because they carry variously weighted burdens.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is, as it were, an indirect address to the reader, hoping that all of us 'whose \softline
wills have roots in good' will pray for these penitents as they indeed pray for us.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's single speech in this canto begins with a reprise of Trajan's climactic \softline
declaration of his willingness to help the widow, '}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giustizia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  vuole e }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 piet{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  mi ritene' (justice wills it \softline
and compassion bids me stay), at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.93.  It is as though Virgil, remembering the \softline
'visible speech' from the representation of Trajan's humility, had assumed these words worked \softline
wonders on Christian hearts, and now puts }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 giustizia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 piet{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (found in the same verse only in \softline
these two scenes) to work on his and Dante's behalf.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The source of the words heard by the travelers is necessarily obscure, since the \softline
faces of all these souls are covered by the rocks that they bear upon their backs.  At the same time \softline
it is morally appropriate that a penitent in pride must speak without identification, since pride is an \softline
insistence on the self, while this anonymity erases it.  However, to argue that all are speaking \softline
together, as some do, is to miss the patent fact that only one soul is speaking (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.52).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 53.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Stiffnecked pride was a frequent complaint about the Hebrew people in the Old 
Testament, particularly in Exodus (32:9, 33:3, 33:5, 34:9) and Deuteronomy (9:6, 9:13, 10:16, \softline
31:27).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The speaker is Omberto Aldobrandesco, second son of Guglielmo Aldobrandesco \softline
(dead by 1256), count of Santafiora (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.111) and head of this powerful Ghibelline \softline
family.  Omberto was murdered by Sienese Guelphs outside his fortified castle in 1259.  He lays \softline
the fault for his death and the need for his current penance on his family's pride in its name, which \softline
made the Aldobrandeschi consider themselves better than others merely by fact of being \softline
Aldobrandeschi.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The reference to every }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in Campagnatico, Omberto's feudal holding with its castle \softline
where he died in battle, is variously interpreted.  The word in Dante's Italian may mean (1) \softline
infantryman, (2) any man at all, especially one of the lower class, (3) a very young child.  Most \softline
commentators support the third view (and we have followed them), but all three are potentially \softline
valid.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the notion that this eleventh canto of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is part of a program that is built on \softline
the number eleven's numerological significance as trangression (because it exceeds the Decalogue \softline
-- the formulation is St. Augustine's), see Victoria Kirkham ("Eleven Is for Evil: Measured \softline
Trespass in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegorica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 [1989]), pp. 40-42.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Omberto is the first penitent in purgatory proper who speaks to the travelers (we \softline
have only heard penitential prayer until now) and his last words clearly identify the purpose of \softline
purgation in the process of absolution (for Dante, necessarily preceded by confession, contrition, \softline
and satisfaction -- see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.94-102).  What seems to be the case is that all those \softline
who have penance to perform on any particular terrace need precisely to give satisfaction (see the \softline
verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sodisfaccia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in verse 71 [as Tozer in his prefatory note to this canto duly noted]) before God \softline
for their transgressions on earth.  This implies that others, those who do }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  need to do penance \softline
on a particular terrace, either were without that sin or else had given satisfaction while they were \softline
still alive.  This is the view taken by Nicola Fosca in his unpublished commentary, portions of \softline
which he has kindly made available to this writer.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Porena (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.112-114) also says that the penitence observed on the \softline
mountain is the form that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 satisfactio operis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  takes in these eventually redeemed souls.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's bending down his face is a natural action taken in order to see his \softline
interlocutor's face, yet it, too, reveals a moral significance (see the note to vv. 46-48), as the \softline
protagonist's own words will later confirm (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.136-138), when he will admit that, once he \softline
returns to the mountain in the next life, his head will be lowered under the same load he now is \softline
able to observe upon the backs of others.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 74-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The next penitent is apparently less heavily weighted (and thus less burdened by \softline
pride) than Omberto, since he is able to move a little under his rock and thus twist his neck \softline
enough to get a glance at the features of Dante, now conveniently lowered by his desire to make \softline
out Omberto.  As a result, Dante recognizes him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Where the first penitent was still deeply involved in the feelings of the family pride that \softline
had afflicted him so greatly on earth, the next will represent all those who are prideful in their \softline
accomplishments (in this case, artistic ones); and we will see that he is more advanced in his 
penitence than Omberto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Oderisi d'Agobbio (contemporary Gubbio) is praised by Dante as the great Italian \softline
master of the art of illuminating manuscripts, an art particularly associated with the French and \softline
with Paris.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Oderisi deflects Dante's compliment, thus showing that his pride is at least greatly \softline
abated (if not utterly vanquished -- see verse 84).  What is at stake here is artistic merit, not the \softline
cry of the vulgar, a subject that will be before us within ten lines.  What Oderisi can now admit is \softline
that, as good as he was at illuminating, in his own opinion Franco of Bologna was superior to him \softline
in his craftmanship -- a truth that he knew but never would have permitted himself to admit during \softline
his emulous life on earth.  It is interesting that Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to vv. 82-88) says \softline
that, from the examples he has seen, Franco really }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 was}{\plain \fs24 \f1  a better illuminator.  By being willing to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 share}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the honor with Franco (this is exactly the burden of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.86-87, the words of Guido \softline
del Duca: 'O race of men, why do you set your hearts / on things that of necessity cannot be \softline
shared?'), Oderisi shows himself now different from the man bent on his own excelling to the cost \softline
of all others.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Little is known of Franco, who apparently lived until about 1310.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   If Oderisi was known by Dante to have died in 1299, he certainly had made his \softline
way up the mountain quickly, apparently spending very little time in ante-purgatory.  Compare the \softline
case of Forese (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII.76-90), the most detailed information we are given in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
about passing over certain terraces on the way toward the summit.  And see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.127-132.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Oderisi, nonetheless, must have reformed his ways very early, since the late-repentant \softline
spend equal time in ante-purgatory as they did while they were unrepentant on earth.  Or perhaps \softline
Dante thought or knew that he had died earlier than we think.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Oderisi's outburst subtly changes the topic of his discourse from human talent and \softline
ability to its reception among other human beings.  Where before he had spoken of Franco's \softline
honor, he now bewails the emptiness of these same talents as recipients of the praise conferred by \softline
fame.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The phrase 'com' poco verde in su la cima dura' (literally: how briefly lasts the green upon \softline
the top) has never been.19 adequately explained.  What object does the poet have in mind for the \softline
noun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cima}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ?  Hollander ("Dante's Self-Laureation [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI, 92]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rassegna europea di \softline
letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1994], pp. 35-48) has argued, citing its next use in the poem, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XV.13, where it refers to Dante's forehead, the space above his eyebrows, that it refers to exactly \softline
that part of our physiognomy here and that the green is the green of the laurel.  The language of \softline
the passage, which addresses the question of the brief limits of fame unless a 'dark age' allows \softline
fame to continue for longer than it usually does (by not producing other 'winners' quickly), seems \softline
clearly to reflect exactly such a concern -- one that was not far, as we know from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXV.1-9, from this poet's mind.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Giovanni Cimabue (1240 ca.-1308) was a highly praised Florentine painter.  His \softline
pupil, Giotto di Bondone (1267 ca.-1337), is given credit by art historians for changing the nature 
of Italian painting, moving from the 'flat' tradition to 'roundness,' representations that seemed \softline
more realistic than anything seen before him.  (In this vein see Boccaccio's treatment of him in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Decameron}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.v.5)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The notion that Dante is in this passage putting Giotto's art ahead of Cimabue's is baseless, \softline
though widespread.  Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 may}{\plain \fs24 \f1  himself have admired Giotto's painting more than Cimabue's, but \softline
that is not the point here.  All that Oderisi is saying is that, in accord with what he has just said \softline
about fame being brief unless a dark age assures the last 'laureate' his continuing green reward, \softline
Cimabue had the public's cry but now Giotto has it.  There is no evaluation of the relative worth \softline
of the work of these two masters stated or implied (see Hollander ["Dante's Self-Laureation \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI, 92)," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rassegna europea di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 (1994)], pp. 41-42).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-98.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Moving his attention from painting to poetry, Oderisi says the same thing about \softline
Guido Guinizzelli (1225 ca.-1276) and Guido Cavalcanti (1250 ca.-1300): one held the highest \softline
place in the public's esteem until the other displaced him.  A problem here arises from Dante's use \softline
of the noun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gloria}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which can mean 'reputation, fame' in the vulgar sense, or 'just renown for great \softline
deeds,' or 'heavenly glory' (as in the experience of paradise).  The word occurs some 22 times in \softline
the poem and has this first meaning less frequently than it has either of the other two, e.g., in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.42, where it is explained that the neutral angels are not in hell lest they be placed lower \softline
than the rebel angels, who might then have 'boasting rights' over them.  But the word has just \softline
been used in its most negative form seven lines earlier: the 'vana gloria' that prompts our desire for \softline
fame.  In this reading, the more recent Guido (Cavalcanti) has taken the public's laurel from \softline
Guinizzelli.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For those, beginning with Guido Di Pino ("Il canto dantesco dei due Guidi," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi in \softline
onore di Alberto Chiari}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Brescia: Paideia, 1973], pp. 419-35), who believe that the first of the \softline
two Guidos is the poet Guittone d'Arezzo (1240 ca.-1294) and the second Guido Guinizzelli \softline
(1230 ca.-1276), see Marcello Ciccuto ("Dante e Bonagiunta: reperti allusivi nel canto XXIV del \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24 \f1  34 [1982]), pp. 390-91, for discussion and bibliography.  See also \softline
Picone (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 {\u171\'ab}Vita Nuova{\u187\'bb} e tradizione romanza}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Padova, Liviana, 1979]), p. 32n., accepting Di \softline
Pino's hypothesis, and then supporting it still more strongly on the heels of Guglielmo Gorni, \softline
"Guittone e Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Guittone d'Arezzo nel settimo centenario della morte: Atti del Convegno \softline
Internazionale di Arezzo (22-24 aprile 1994)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. M. Picone (Florence: Franco Cesati, 1995), pp. \softline
326-34.  This argument needs to confront at least one major problem: Dante twice refers to \softline
Guittone by name in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.56 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.124); for him to have \softline
chosen to do so under another (and Latinate) form of that name (Guido), as they contend, is a \softline
proposition extremely difficult to accept.  For still other reasons not to believe that the reference \softline
is to Guittone see Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984]), p. \softline
128n., and, still more tellingly, Durling ("'Mio figlio ov'{\f3 \'50}?' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X, 60]," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: da Firenze \softline
all'aldil{\f3 \'42}.  Atti del terzo Seminario dantesco internazionale}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Michelangelo Picone [Florence: \softline
Cesati, 2001]), p. 320 (n. 44).  It is also difficult to believe that the older poet had chased the \softline
younger {\u8219\'27}from the nest,{\u8219\'27} for even if they were no more than ten years apart in age, Guido is \softline
generally thought of as the elder of the two, both literally and morally.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   While there is still some dispute about the reference, most now agree that Dante is \softline
clearly pointing to himself as the one who will in turn replace Cavalcanti in the 'nest' of the public's \softline
admiration.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab Karlheinz Stierle ("Canto XI," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges \softline
G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), p. 163, thinks Oderisi predicts \softline
Dante's 'triumph' here and believes that Dante meant us to take from his words the understanding \softline
that he believes pride a necessary and positive aspect of his own }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ingegno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and not entirely to be \softline
dispraised.  To medieval readers this would surely have seemed an inappropriate reading.  On the \softline
other hand, recent modern readers, with whose work Stierle seems not to be acquainted, have \softline
tried to make essentially the same case: Teodolinda Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Undivine "Comedy": \softline
Detheologizing Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992]), pp. 133-37, and Herbert \softline
Marks ("Hollowed Names: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vox}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vanitas}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  110 [1992]), pp. \softline
135-78.  For a response see Hollander ("Dante's Self-Laureation [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI, 92]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rassegna \softline
europea di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1994]), pp. 35-48.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Oderisi's moralizing is pungent and clear: earthly fame is not worth even a \softline
moment's affection.  It is difficult to justify any positive role for earthly fame in light of these \softline
forceful words.  For the relationship blink of an eye:completion of a Great Year (36,000 \softline
years)::one thousand years:eternity, which yields a rough trillion one hundred and thirty-five \softline
billion years of Dante's eternally being forgotten, see Hollander ("Dante's Self-Laureation \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI, 92]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rassegna europea di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1994]), p. 47.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These are babytalk words for bread (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pappo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  = }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pane}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) and money (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dindi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  = }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 denaro}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Without as yet naming him, Oderisi tells the cautionary tale of Provenzan \softline
Salvani, 'prominent Ghibelline of Siena, born c. 1220.  His family, the Salvani were descendants of \softline
the Cacciaconti, feudal lords of Scialenga.  Provenzano's father, Ildebrando, and his paternal \softline
grandfather, Salvano (who gave his name to his descendants), were both prominent Ghibellines.  \softline
Provenzan himself begins to appear in the records in 1247..., and from 1249 his political activities \softline
can be followed fairly well. After the Battle of Montaperti (Sept. 4, 1260) he was virtual dictator \softline
of Siena, and it was he who at the Council of Empoli after the battle advocated the destruction of \softline
Florence, which was averted by the firmness and patriotism of Farinata (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . x.91).  He was \softline
podest{\f3 \'42} of Montepulciano in 1261 and was elected podest{\f3 \'42} of Arezzo in 1262-1263, but did not \softline
serve; but after the Battle of Benevento (Feb. 1265/6) his power, along with that of the \softline
Ghibellines generally, was on the wane. He met his death in an engagement with the Florentines at \softline
Colle, in Valdelsa, June 11, 1269, when he was taken prisoner and beheaded' (Toynbee, \softline
"Provenzan Salvani" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is curious that, of these two great Ghibelline leaders, Dante has condemned Farinata \softline
(who saved the city) to hell and saved Provenzan (who wanted to destroy it).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the biblical passages that underlie this image of the fleetingness of grass as \softline
being similar to human ambitions in this life, see the Old Testament (Isaiah 28:4, 38:27, 40:6; \softline
Psalm 89:6 [90:5-6]), as noted by Tommaseo in his commentary to these verses.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-119.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is Dante's first and not last (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.133-138) admission of his \softline
pridefulness.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Here again is the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sodisfar}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.70-72.  Provenzan is 
completing his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 satisfactio operis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  before Dante's eyes, so intent on it that he is not allowed a \softline
speaking part, but has Oderisi as his mouthpiece.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   If Provenzan died in 1269 and was (as is obvious) more than 31 years old when \softline
he died, the protagonist wants to know how, if the sentence in ante-purgatory is a year for each \softline
year spent in failure to repent and if Provenzan apparently, from Oderisi's narrative, died in his \softline
presumption, he can have come up here so quickly.  We should remember that Dante was }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
surprised (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.88-90) at Oderisi's quick advent (perhaps less than a year \softline
separating his death and his arrival), somehow understanding that Oderisi had purged his pride \softline
quite early in his life and chosen to live for God.  Why Dante might have thought so is not known.  \softline
\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Oderisi's third speech, devoted to Provenzan, shows Dante that, in his lifetime, \softline
Provenzan had come to grips with his pride.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrasing here has its roots in -- is indeed a translation of -- a passage in \softline
Bonaventure's life of St. Francis, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Legenda maior}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.7), 'omni deposita verecundia,' where \softline
Francis, setting aside all shame, becomes a mendicant.  The attribution, which seems undeniable, \softline
has made its way into the commentary tradition over the last one hundred years, often unassigned, \softline
although some trace it back to Panzacchi's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lectura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of 1901.  However, Bosco/Reggio (comm. to \softline
vv. 121-142) and Herbert Marks ("Hollowed Names: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vox}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vanitas}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  110 [1992]), p. 177 (n. 55), give credit to Passerini in 1898.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139-142.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   And just as Provenzan humbled himself in public by his own volition, Dante will \softline
have humility thrust upon him by his own people when the Black Guelphs will exile him from \softline
Florence in 1302.  For the predictions of Dante's personal fortunes in the poem see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.64-66.\par
}}