{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 26}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's brief admonition will be his only utterance in this canto, which, like the twenty-fourth, is heavily involved in questions regarding vernacular poetry, thus necessarily marginalizing \softline
Virgil's presence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante, according to the calculations of Trucchi (comm. to vv. 1-6), having begun his \softline
climb of the mountain at due east at the antipodes, has now reached a point some 25}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  short of due \softline
west.  As for the time, it has apparently taken a bit more than two hours to climb between the two \softline
terraces (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.1-3).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A shadow cast upon flames does indeed make them glow a darker color.  (See \softline
Richard Abrams [}{\plain \fs24 \f1 "Illicit Pleasures: Dante among the Sensualists [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern \softline
Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  100 [1985], pp. 1-41}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ] for a consideration of this image as emblematic of the \softline
themes of this canto.)  Once again Dante's presence in the body serves as a provocation to a \softline
group of penitents.  Our translation takes into account and follows the argument of Picone \softline
("Canto XXVI," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and \softline
Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), pp. 407-8, based in the earlier observation of \softline
Mario Marti ("Il XXVI del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  come omaggio d'arte: Guinizzelli e Daniello nel cammino \softline
poetico di Dante," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Galatina: Congedo, 1984 (1978)]), p. 156, that the 'sign' \softline
created by Dante's shadow is not presented as a minor one, but as something quite extraordinary, \softline
as the notice it receives from many of the penitents, even while they are intent on their purgation, \softline
would indicate.  And thus the adverb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pur}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (which can have the very different meanings of 'only' or \softline
of 'indeed') here does not take away from the importance of the sign but stresses it, i.e., does not \softline
mean 'only,' as many commentators believe (but see, among others, Lombardi [comm. to the \softline
verses], who reads }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pur}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as having that second and intensifying sense, as do Marti and Picone).  \softline
Among modern commentators who deal closely with these lines, only Chimenz, Giacalone, and \softline
Bosco/Reggio support this reading.  Chimenz, for example, argues that the excited reaction of the \softline
penitents (comm. to vv. 16-24) does not seem a response to a 'small' stimulus.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   At }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.36 the poet speaks of the shades of the gluttons as 'lor vanit{\f3 \'42} che par \softline
persona' (their emptiness, which seems real bodies).  Here the penitents remark at Dante's \softline
condition; his body does not seem to be, like theirs, 'fictitious,' airy (about which state we have \softline
just heard Statius's lengthy disquisition).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Their impulse, reversing Dante's, is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to leave the searing flames.  Again we sense \softline
the eagerness of penitents to undergo their purgation.  See the remark of Forese Donati, 'I speak \softline
of pain but should say solace' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.72).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-20.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The speaker is Guido Guinizzelli (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.92), the previous \softline
Italian poet to whom, we will learn, Dante now feels the greatest allegiance.  While Guido may or \softline
may not be correct in thinking Dante is following the two other souls out of reverence rather than \softline
from lack of zeal (or fear of the flames that he must enter), what he cannot know (and never \softline
discovers) is that these are the great shades of Virgil and Statius.  We, however, do know that and \softline
realize that this scene is the last in a series that began in the cantos devoted to Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX-XXII), a program devoted to an exploration of the nature of Dante's poetics in relation to those of \softline
other poets: Statius, Bonagiunta (who throws in Giacomo da Lentini and Guittone d'Arezzo for \softline
good measure), and, in this canto, Guinizzelli (adding Giraut de Bornelh and poor Guittone again) \softline
and Arnaut Daniel.  No other part of the poem is as extensively or as richly concerned with the \softline
purposes of poetry.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab There is some debate among the commentators about the metaphoric or literal nature of \softline
the thirst to which Guido refers: 'answer me, since I burn with thirst and fire' (verse 18).  While \softline
hunger and thirst were the natural penalties undergone by the penitent gluttons, there is no such \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 contrapasso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here.  Further, Guido's description of his co-sufferers' 'thirst' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.20-21) is \softline
surely metaphoric, thus suggesting that this first mention of thirst is also.  For this view, among \softline
others, see Lino Pertile ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy," Introductory \softline
Readings II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, \softline
Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1993]), p. 381.  On the other hand, the fire of which he \softline
speaks is literal enough, as Dante will find out in the next canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.49-51), and his \softline
aerial body surely allows him to feel such sensations.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 17.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Benvenuto's gloss (comm. to vv. 16-18) to this verse is amusing.  After identifying 'the \softline
others' as Virgil and Statius, he comments on the phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 non per esser pi{\f3 \'6a} tardo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (which he \softline
apparently took to mean, 'not for having come later than they') as follows: 'as though he were \softline
saying, "not because you are a modern poet and they ancient," for the passage of time does not \softline
make poems improve as it indeed does improve wines.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This remarkable simile, a rare medieval manifestation of a moment of fraternal \softline
affection between heterosexuals and homosexuals, is striking.  The passage probably reflects \softline
Paul's admonition in Romans 16:16: 'Greet one another with a holy kiss,' as was suggested by \softline
Scartazzini (comm. to verse 32).  For the ants, see Virgil's memorable simile in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.402-407.  Aeneas's men, preparing their ships for departure from Carthage, are described as follows: \softline
'Just so do ants, when winter's on their mind, pillage great stores of grain and fill their houses to \softline
the beams.  Over the fields moves a black column, carrying their spoil through the grass along \softline
their narrow path; some heave the huge seeds upon their shoulders, some shape up the columns, \softline
rebuking their delay.  All the path fairly shines with labor.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Those who have argued that the sin punished in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV and XVI is not \softline
homosexuality (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.13-21) are hard pressed to account for the obvious reference of the \softline
word 'Sodom' repeated here, used first in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.50 to refer to the sinners on the barren sands \softline
of homosexuality.  The early commentators have no doubt whatsoever about all this.  See, for \softline
example, John of Serravalle (comm. to vv. 37-42): 'And from this city, Sodom, the sin against \softline
nature took its name, just as simony did from Simon [Magus].'  Each group cries out the \softline
appropriate exemplar(s) of its sin, the first the homosexuals, calling out the names of these two \softline
'cities of the plain' (see Genesis 19:1-28), the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 locus classicus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  for homosexual lust, where the men \softline
of Sodom ask Lot to give them for their sexual pleasure the two angels who have come to Lot \softline
and whom they take for men (Genesis 19:4-11).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab What has long been problematic is the fact that, in Inferno, we find the heterosexual lustful \softline
punished in the realm of Incontinence, while those guilty of homoerotic behavior are in that of \softline
Violence (against nature, in their case).  That these two groups are now purging themselves on 
the same terrace may be the result of the changed ground rules for the sins of the two }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
more than of any supposed change of heart on Dante's part, that is, Dante no longer has the \softline
option of fitting these two different bands onto an Aristotelian/Ciceronian grid, but must associate \softline
them with one of the seven capital vices, which leaves him little choice.  Nonetheless, no matter \softline
what his intentions, the effect is to make the reader feel that the poet has now softened his views.  \softline
The notion of Pertile ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy," Introductory Readings \softline
II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, \softline
Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1993]), p. 388, that the impulse to love is the same in \softline
hetero- and homosexuals and that, since in purgatory only the impulse (or predisposition) toward \softline
sin is purged, there is no longer any need to distinguish between them is interesting but difficult to \softline
accept.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  homosexuality is treated as a sin of hardened will, and one would be hard \softline
pressed to show that this does not make the 'impulse' that drives it different from that behind the \softline
sins of Incontinence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 41-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The heterosexuals call out the name of Pasipha{\f2\u235\'eb} (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.12-13 and note), the \softline
wife of Minos, king of Crete, who had Deadalus build for her a wooden frame covered with a \softline
cowhide so that she could be mounted by a bull.  The child of this union was the Minotaur.  \softline
Pasipha{\f2\u235\'eb} here is clearly meant to represent the animalistic nature of unrestrained lust, not some \softline
sort of sodomy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The hypothetical nature of this simile is underlined by Dante's use of the \softline
subjunctive mood for its main verb (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 volasser}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Cranes do not and would not migrate \softline
simultaneously in two different directions, north to the Riphaean mountains and also south to the \softline
sands of the (Libyan?) desert.  Dante has developed the passage on the model, perhaps, of some \softline
of Lucan's similes concerning cranes (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.64-74), but the resemblance \softline
does not seem more than casual, if the closest would seem to be that found at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Pharsalia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.832-834.  For a meditation upon Dante's cranes here and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.46-49 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXIV.64-69 see Guglielmo Gorni ("'Gru' di Dante: Lettura di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Rassegna \softline
europea di letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [1994]), pp. 23-30.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The 'former song' of the penitents is the hymn }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Summae Deus clementiae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  punctuated by the \softline
words of Mary at the Annunciation and those regarding Diana's chaste anger at Callisto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXV.121-132).  Each sub-group also then sends up 'the cry that most befits' it, that is, either \softline
'Sodom and Gomorrah' or 'Pasipha{\f2\u235\'eb}.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante at last responds to the request of the penitents, if only to some degree, since \softline
he does not fully identify himself, in keeping with his avoidance of doing so on other terraces.  He \softline
defines himself in terms of his intermediate age (neither youthful and unripe nor ancient and ripe), \softline
tells them what they suspected (he is here in the flesh, not in the aerial body), and that Beatrice \softline
(not named, and decidedly not the sort of woman penitents here 'do time' for) draws him \softline
heavenward.  Thus he admits to his miraculous presence among them, but gives no information \softline
that might genuinely satisfy their curiosity.  In return for relatively little he asks to know the \softline
identity of those with whom he speaks and the condition of the group that has moved away from \softline
them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab His evasive behavior here allows him to avoid naming himself uselessly to those who do \softline
not know him (see his similar avoidance with Sapia [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIII.133-138], Guido del Duca [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  
XIV.20-21], and Marco the Lombard [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI.37-42]).  Those who recognize Dante in \softline
purgatory are as follows: Casella (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.76-78), Belacqua (recognized by Dante at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
IV.109-123; it would seem that he knows Dante but does not, in his laconic, sardonic way, reveal \softline
that he does); Nino Visconti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.46-57); Oderisi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.76); Forese (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.40-42); and Bonagiunta (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.35-36).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-65.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Benvenuto's (comm. to vv. 61-66) paraphrase: 'as though to say, so that I may \softline
write of you souls and give your true reputation, in case there should remain in the world \softline
infamous word of your lust.'  Dante's way of promising to record the penitents' presence on the \softline
road to salvation (we must remember that his charitable offer is made without knowing the \softline
identity of any of the souls whom he here addresses) so that it may draw prayers from the living \softline
and thus hasten their passage to bliss will be enlarged in Guido's final request of Dante (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXVI.130-132), where he hopes for prayers of intercession on his behalf in Heaven itself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The language here reflects the mode of preparing a manuscript for inscription, the \softline
pencilling in of guidelines that can be erased once ink is set to vellum or paper.  Dante imagines, \softline
from the vantage point of his progress through the second kingdom of the afterworld, the \softline
preparation, by his own hand, of the manuscript of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  once he is back in the world.  \softline
Here the preparation of the page equates with its completion, the inscription of Guido Guinizzelli \softline
in the Book of Life.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.54-57 and note; see also the less generous, but similar, \softline
offer made to Bocca degli Abati at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.93.  Bocca is also recorded, but in the Book of \softline
the Dead.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-70.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a later resonance of the image of the rustic mountainman struck dumb by the \softline
sights of the city, see Boccaccio's 'meta-}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 novella}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Decameron}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.Intro.19-20), when the normally \softline
appetitive son of Filippo Balducci, Boccaccio's version of Dante's 'montanaro... rozzo e selvatico' \softline
(the mountaineer... rough and rustic), descends with his father from their monastic mountain and \softline
sees Florence for the first time, immediately falling under the spell of the lovely women in the \softline
beautiful city.  (For Boccaccio's redoing of Dante's text see Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Boccaccio's Dante and the \softline
Shaping Force of Satire}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1997)], p. 75.)  However, and \softline
as William Stephany pointed out in a lecture at Dartmouth College on 31 August 1983, Dante's \softline
mountainman is a revised version of his own earlier portrait of such rude folk.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari \softline
eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.i.6) he declaims that the illustrious vernacular is not fitting to 'mountaineers who \softline
treat of rustic matters' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 montaninis rusticana tractantibus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Here, in a sort of palinode, he chides \softline
his younger self for his stylistic and intellectual snobbery, making these saved souls amazed at the \softline
presence of this writer of low vernacular texts and thus canceling the prideful assertiveness of his \softline
younger self.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido uses a nautical metaphor to praise Dante's on-loading of this precious cargo of \softline
knowledge, paraphrased by Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 73-75) as follows: Dante is one who \softline
'gathers and assembles in the bark of his wit' the mountain's source of knowledge that will allow \softline
him a better chance for salvation.  Dante's substitution of the verb 'to die,' where a more \softline
conventional thought would have posited 'to live,' brought the following admiring thought from \softline
Benvenuto: 'And I do not doubt but that this poet lived better and died better because he \softline
compiled this work.'  Thus Benvenuto suggests that the poem, not only, as others have thought \softline
(and as Dante claimed -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.34-36), would bring at least some of its readers to salvation, 
but had had this result for its author himself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido now addresses Dante's question (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.65-66), brought on by the sight \softline
of the second group of penitents that had caught his attention (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.25-27).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 77-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As part of his rather cruel treatment of Julius Caesar, who has already been put \softline
forward as a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 positive}{\plain \fs24 \f1  exemplary figure of zeal (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.101-102 and note), Dante now \softline
makes him an 'informal exemplar' (this practice is observable elsewhere only once on the \softline
mountain: see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.25-30) of homosexual lust (that is, he is not a part of the \softline
'official' program of those who are presented to all penitents, but is mentioned only to Dante by \softline
Guido).  This makes him perhaps the only exemplary figure in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to have both positive \softline
and negative valences.  Again we can see how complex, troubled, and unremitting Dante's \softline
response to Julius was.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 76-81) dutifully and ashamedly reports Caesar's one known \softline
homosexual experience but surrounds it, in his perplexity and discomfort, with a list of Julius's (at \softline
times outrageous) sexual encounters with women.  In a similar mode, John of Serravalle (comm. \softline
to vv. 76-81) insists that Julius was a mere fourteen years old at the time of this misadventure.  \softline
Dante's source for poor Julius's escapade in Bithynia may eventually be found in Suetonius's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Life \softline
of the Caesars}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (ch. 49), as Daniello reports (comm. to vv. 76-78), citing the lines that were \softline
supposedly cried out against him when he returned from Gaul in triumph: 'See how Caesar \softline
triumphs, having conquered Gaul; / Nicomedes triumphs not, but he made Caesar fall.'  What had \softline
happened?  Apparently, when Julius was young and serving in Bithynia, the king, who admired \softline
him, got him drunk and had sexual relations with him.  Other tales make Caesar a more willing \softline
accomplice to the king's desire, e.g., Suetonius, attributing the story to Cicero, cites the report \softline
that he was dressed in purple as the queen of the realm at a wild party that ended in his \softline
'deflowering,' etc.  Later Dante commentators (e.g., Oelsner [comm. to these verses]) suggest that \softline
Dante's source was a much condensed version of the events in Bithynia found in Uguccione of \softline
Pisa's entry for 'triumph' in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Magnae derivationes}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which adverts to Bithynia and to Caesar's \softline
being called both 'king' and 'queen' during one of his triumphs.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word 'hermaphrodite,' here doubtless means (and only means) 'heterosexual' \softline
(from Ovid's tale of Salmacis and the son of Hermes (Mercury) and Aphrodite (Venus), \softline
Hermaphroditus [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.285-388], in which their two genders are eventually included in a \softline
single double-sexed human being).  If 'hermaphrodite' here meant other than that, the only souls \softline
saved from the sin of Lust would have been homosexual and bisexual, that is, there would be no \softline
heterosexual penitents on the mountain.  The commentary tradition yields some amusing missteps \softline
on this subject.  Francesco da Buti (comm. to vv. 76-87), selecting 'hermaphrodite' (in the sense \softline
of bisexual) as the second category of the penitent lustful on the mountain, tells the tale of a \softline
person he had seen, while he was a youth, who dressed as a man but who sat at the distaff and \softline
spun wool, using the name 'Mistress Piera.'  It is only with Gabriele (comm. to this verse) and \softline
Daniello (comm. to vv. 82-87) that commentators get the problem cleared up: these are the \softline
penitent heterosexual lovers.  There was still so much confusion three centuries later that even \softline
Scartazzini (comm. to this verse) felt that he had to do a full review of the question.  In our own \softline
day, however, the confusion has again become manifest.  See Bernard Knox, reviewing W. S. \softline
Merwin's translation of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 New York Review of Books,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  21 September 2000), where the 
word is translated as 'the performance as both sexes,' and the corrective rejoinder by Peter \softline
D'Epiro in the same journal (15 November 2001).  It should be said that it was provocative for \softline
Dante to have used the myth as he chose to.  Ovid's original tale is quite startling in its sexual role \softline
reversals: Salmacis behaving like a traditional slavering male while Hermaphroditus behaves like a \softline
traditional inviting female (even performing an unintended striptease before the excited Salmacis, \softline
peeping from her hiding place in the woods).  The tale seems fully intended to serve as the \softline
foundation myth of hermaphroditism.  That was not enough, however, to protect it from Dante's \softline
by now unsurprisingly elastic and eclectic reading of classical material.  His meaning for the word \softline
is clear: 'heterosexual'; to arrive at that unriddling, he probably foresaw, would cause his readers \softline
some exertion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 83-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These lines themselves possess the capacity to settle a problem that some readers \softline
prefer to keep open.  How can the name of Pasipha{\f2\u235\'eb}, who was involved not in heterosexual lust \softline
between humans, but in sodomy (sexual contact between human and beast), be used here to \softline
indicate the former?  He and his companions, Guido makes plain, did }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  commit 'unnatural' \softline
sexual acts, but broke the laws that govern human sexual concourse, specifically those of \softline
marriage, and did so with an untamed energy that is more fit for beasts than humans, and is thus \softline
symbolized by a woman who conspired to be entered by a bull.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The large number of those who repine their former lust seems to be commensurate \softline
with those who are condemned forever to relive it; see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.67-69, where Virgil points out \softline
to Dante a vast number of identifiable sinners -- and this after we have already seen huge flocks of \softline
essentially anonymous lovers (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.40-42).  And these sinners here, like those among whom we \softline
find Francesca and Paolo, are also compared to cranes (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.43-45; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.46-49).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 92.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The speaker finally reveals himself as Guido Guinizzelli.  'The most illustrious of the \softline
Italian poets prior to Dante, he belonged to the family of the Principi of Bologna, in which city he \softline
was born ca. 1230.  In 1270 he was Podest{\f3 \'42} of Castelfranco; in 1274, when the Ghibelline \softline
Lambertazzi were expelled from Bologna, Guido with the rest of the Principi, who belonged to \softline
the same party, was forced to leave his native city; he is said to have died in exile at Verona in \softline
1276' (Toynbee, "Guido Guinizelli" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  His most famous poem is the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  'Al cor gentil rempaira sempre amore' (Love always finds shelter in the noble heart).  It \softline
sets out the doctrine, embraced by Dante in the fourth treatise of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , that true nobility is \softline
not determined by birth but by inner virtue.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Since Guido had died ca. 1276, he has made his way from Ostia in very good time \softline
indeed, passing through ante-purgatory and the first six terraces in less than a quarter century.  \softline
Such speedy passage through purgation is a feature common to all the major figures whom Dante \softline
meets on the mountain, one forced on him by his predilection for the recently dead (Statius being \softline
the only ancient of note upon the slopes of the mountain allowed a speaking part, while Hugh \softline
Capet is the oldest 'modern').  However, we have no idea how long any of the souls whom we see \softline
will be at their penance (if Statius is a model, a good long time, since he spent more than 1200 \softline
years purging himself [see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.22-24]).  We simply have no idea how long \softline
Guido must stay in the fire for his lust.  Time is not over for any of these sympathetic figures, and \softline
the mysteries of penance and redemption leave such concerns unresolved.  For all we know, 
Manfred or Belacqua may finish purgation before Guido does.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In a striking example of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 abbreviatio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Dante boils down a lengthy scene in Statius's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (V.499-730) to two lines.  The story to which he refers runs roughly as follows.  \softline
Hypsipyle was the daughter of the king of Lemnos, whom she saved from death when the women \softline
of the island determined to kill all the males on it.  She was subsequently seduced and abandoned \softline
by Jason (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.88-95), by whom she had twin sons, Thoas and Euneus.  When the Lemnian \softline
women discover that their king is still alive, Hypsipyle flees, and after a misadventure with pirates \softline
ends up in the service of the king of Nemea, Lycurgus.  While caring for Archemorus, the king's \softline
son, she was approached by the seven exiled warriors marching against Thebes in civil war.  Since \softline
they were thirsty, she agreed to show them to water (the fountain of Langia -- see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1 XXII.112), but left the baby behind long enough for him to be killed by a snake.  Lycurgus \softline
would have killed her but for the chance arrival of her twin sons.  Once they have quelled the \softline
attempt on their mother's life, they embrace her eagerly, more eagerly than Dante will move to \softline
embrace Guido because he fears the flames.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 94-99) remembers the reference to Guido's having been \softline
'driven from the nest' at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.97-99, and that he had been cast forth precisely by Dante.  \softline
But who are these other poets who wrote (the verb is in the past tense) better poems than Dante?  \softline
While most commentators simply avoid this problem, those who deal with it tend to favor Guido \softline
Cavalcanti and Cino da Pistoia.  The first precision of any value is only made by Tommaseo \softline
(comm. to these verses) pointing out that Dante here refers to style, and not language (i.e., he is \softline
not limiting the field to Italians, as some argue), as we can see by his later inclusion of Arnaut in \softline
this canto.  (But Arnaut cannot have been a 'son' of Guido because he lived and wrote before the \softline
Bolognese master.)  Steiner (comm. to these lines) suggests that Cino da Pistoia is one of these \softline
elect.  Trucchi (comm. to vv. 94-99) insists that the distinction is purely formal, stylistic, since \softline
Dante had insisted, two cantos earlier (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.52-54), that his and no other's was the true \softline
'intelligence of love,' which alone accounts for his innovations in the content and substance of \softline
poetry; but Trucchi does not say who he thinks are indicated.  Porena (comm. to vv. 61-62) \softline
considers the matter in some detail and suggests that the most probable names are those of \softline
Cavalcanti, Cino, and Lapo Gianni.  Cavalcanti's name is heard in Chimenz (comm. to these \softline
verses) along with Cino's.  And that pair is mentioned also by Giacalone (comm. to vv. 96-99) and \softline
by Bosco/Reggio (to this passage), who also tentatively offer the name of Lapo Gianni, as had \softline
Porena.  On the whole, the commentary tradition has been extremely cautious in trying to piece \softline
together Dante's thoughts about Guinizzelli's other 'progeny.'  However, Roberto Antonelli \softline
("Cavalcanti e Dante: al di qua del Paradiso," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: da Firenze all'aldil{\f3 \'42}.  Atti del terzo \softline
Seminario dantesco internazionale}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001]), p. 294, \softline
insists on an implausible reading of verse 98 to make the comparative adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 miglior}{\plain \fs24 \f1  refer to \softline
Guinizzelli alone; but see the sensible objection raised by Del Sal in the discussion of Antonelli's \softline
paper, pp. 366-67.  For the later reappearance of the adjective 'sweet,' see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.112 \softline
and note.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is not difficult to understand how much Dante wants his reader to understand \softline
the importance of Guido to his sense of himself as poet.  No one else on the mountain is treated as \softline
respectfully as he.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab His oath to Guido evidently was to swear to tell the truth (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.109).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 107.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido, like Bonagiunta, refers to hearing Dante's voice with the relative clause 'ch'i' \softline
odo' (that I hear).  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.57.  Both clauses draw attention to the importance that \softline
each of these predecessor poets places on listening to the living voice of this extraordinary visitor \softline
to their realm.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido's request allows Dante to formulate another defining moment that will \softline
use no more than the space of a difficult tercet to respond to the remarks of a poetic predecessor \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.49-51).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Beginning in these lines, words for truth and for speaking or for writing poetry wend their \softline
way through 22 lines (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ver}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here in vv. 109, 121, 126; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dir}{\plain \fs24 \f1  or its derivative }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 detto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [poem] in vv. 111, \softline
112, 119, 130).  Their conjunction reminds the reader of the importance of the issue of the \softline
possibility of poetic truth, given the traditional view that poets are liars.  It may be helpful to \softline
know that in Dante's day a poet in the vernacular was known as a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dicitore per rima}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a 'speaker in \softline
rhyme.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the rarity of Dante's use of the honorific }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 voi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , here given to Guido, see the note \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.131.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab If Guido's poems are }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dolci}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (sweet), in what way are they different from those of Dante \softline
that are written in the 'sweet new style' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.57)?  This is a question that has had a \softline
variety of answers.  Some make Guido the first practitioner of the 'sweet new style' (which is \softline
impossible, in Dante's view, given his precisions at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.49-51 that make his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
'Donne ch'avete,' written at least ten years after Guido's death, the first of the 'new' poems that \softline
constitute the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dolce stil novo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  The better understanding is that Guido Guinizzelli, Guido \softline
Cavalcanti, others among the Tuscans, and surely Dante himself, all wrote in the 'sweet style' (the \softline
most effective demonstration of this is found in Lino Leonardi ["Cavalcanti, Dante e il nuovo \softline
stile," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: da Firenze all'aldil{\f3 \'42}.  Atti del terzo Seminario dantesco internazionale}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. \softline
Michelangelo Picone (Florence: Cesati, 2001), pp. 331-54]).  But what both Guidos, the early \softline
Dante, and just about everybody else failed to do was to find the 'new style' that Dante developed \softline
from his understanding of Guinizzelli's sweet style of praise, a mode that he took one step farther \softline
when he developed his own theologized poetics of Beatrice.  In that he was the first, and had \softline
perhaps no more than one companion (Cino da Pistoia, who also wrote 'theologically' of Beatrice \softline
after her death).  This is what the evidence of the texts seems to suggest.  In short, Dante honors \softline
Guinizzelli for being what he was, as far as the younger poet was concerned, the 'father' of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dolce stil novo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , but not one of its practitioners.  Thus we may understand that a number of poets \softline
wrote in the 'sweet style,' but hardly any of them achieved the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 new}{\plain \fs24 \f1  'sweet style' that is the hallmark \softline
of Dante's praise of Beatrice.  In all aspects of this debate, it is essential to remember that we are \softline
trying (or should, at any rate, be trying) to negotiate an answer from what Dante }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 said}{\plain \fs24 \f1  happened, \softline
not from what actually happened (or what we imagine actually happened).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 113-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's affectionate remark bestows less than it may seem to do, for all his \softline
unquestionable admiration of Guido.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.97-108 we are told both that this Guido \softline
had been eclipsed by Guido Cavalcanti in the public's esteem and that fame for artistic excellence \softline
does not last very long, in any case.  In short, 'modern custom' is not enduring.  As long as such 
poems (i.e., those in the Italian vernacular) are written, Guido's will be read; he will have an \softline
honored place amongst the vernacular poets.  Dante, partly because of his own endeavors on \softline
Guido's behalf, got it right.  His praise, however, is not of the order of his praise of Virgil; \softline
according to Beatrice }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  fame will last as long as the world lasts (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.59-50), a life that even \softline
Dante probably thought would be longer than that enjoyed by the Italian vernacular (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXVI.133-138).  For Dante's relationship to Guido see discussions in Mario Marti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Con Dante \softline
fra i poeti del suo tempo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Lecce: Milella, 1966]), Gianfranco Folena ("Il canto di Guido \softline
Guinizzelli," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  154 [1977], pp. 481-508), Vincenzo \softline
Moleta (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Guinizzelli in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 1980]), and Teodolinda \softline
Barolini (), esp. pp. 125-36.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-116.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido now, in a moment of evidently heartfelt humility, insists on Arnaut \softline
Daniel's superiority in the vernacular, but in the vernacular of Provence, an area in the southeast \softline
of what is now France; it only came under the official rule of the French kings in 1245.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 'Arnaut Daniel, famous Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al poet (fl. 1180-1200); but little is known of his life \softline
beyond that he belonged to a noble family of Ribeyrac in P{\f2\u233\'e9}rigord, that he spent much of his time \softline
at the court of Richard Coeur-de-Lion, and that he visited Paris, where he attended the coronation \softline
of Philip Augustus, as well as Spain, and perhaps Italy.  His works, such as they have been \softline
preserved, consist of eighteen lyrical poems, one satirical, the rest amatory' (Toynbee, "Arnaldo \softline
Daniello" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Arnaut's poems are brilliantly difficult, written in the so-called }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 trobar clus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (a modern \softline
translation could be 'hermetic verse'), typified by its harsh tones and challenging phrasing; in other \softline
words, he avoids the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 trobar leu}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (a more open style, easier and more mellifluous).  On Dante's \softline
knowledge and use of Arnaut's poems see Maurizio Perugi ("Arnaut Daniel in Dante,"  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  51 [1978], pp. 59-152.).  For a brief overview in English of Dante's relations with \softline
Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al poets and poetry see Thomas Bergin ("Dante's Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al Gallery," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Speculum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  40 \softline
[1965], pp. 15-30).  And for a substantial study of Dante's response to previous modern poets, \softline
Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al and Italian, see Teodolinda Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University \softline
Press, 1984]), pp. 85-187.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 117-118.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   What does it mean to say that Arnaut was 'a better craftsman of the mother \softline
tongue'?  Not, it would appear, that he wrote poems that were better in substance than those of \softline
others, but better in style, better made.  It is possible that Guinizzelli's language reflects the claim \softline
that lay latent (but clear enough) in some poems of Cavalcanti, who liked to use the image of the \softline
file (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 limo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), an instrument used to refine one's handiwork, to suggest the careful nature of his own \softline
poeticizing.  Dante here would seem to be, through the testimony of Guinizzelli, taking some of \softline
that distinction away from the other Guido and, in a sense, replacing him with Arnaut, a craftsman \softline
not only better than he, but better than Cavalcanti, too.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The 'mother tongue' here not only refers to Arnaut's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 langue d'oc}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , his native Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al, but \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 any}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Latin-derived vernacular (see Sordello's similar remark, addressed to Virgil, at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
VII.16-17, which also makes Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al the child of Latin: 'O glory of the Latins... through whom \softline
our language showed what it could do').\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Guido also seems to mean that Arnaut's vernacular verse was stylistically better than \softline
anyone else's writing in the vernacular, whether in verse (in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 langue d'oc}{\plain \fs24 \f1  -- Dante is cavalierly \softline
unconcerned, at least publicly, with French poetry) or in prose fiction (in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 langue d'o{\f3 \'56}l}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , since 
according to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.x.2, all vernacular prose was written in French).  This \softline
passage is the cause of much debate, one issue in which centers on the question of whether or not \softline
Dante means that Arnaut himself wrote prose fiction.  This seems more than dubious.  See \softline
Poletto's comment to this effect (gloss on vv. 118-120).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 119-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Giraut de Borneil, one of the most famous troubadours of his century, born at \softline
Essidueil, near Limoges, ca. 1175, died ca. 1220' (Toynbee, "Geradus de Borneil" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante \softline
Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  Dante refers to him a number of times in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and once in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , never slightingly -- quite the opposite is true.  Hence Dante's about-face here is \softline
dramatic.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.ii.9 he had made Girault his own Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al counterpart: \softline
Dante presented himself as the leading poetic celebrant of virtue in Italian, while Giraut was \softline
presented in exactly the same role for his language group.  In the same passage Arnault Daniel \softline
was put into the identical relationship with Dante's then first friend, Cino da Pistoia; they are the \softline
twin wonders of amorous poetry.  However, and as Barolini points out (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: \softline
Princeton University Press, 1984]), pp. 98-99, Giraut is clearly ranked above Arnaut.  For \softline
consideration of Dante's possible reasons for wanting now to distance himself from Giraut see \softline
Picone ("Giraut de Bornelh nella prospettiva di Dante," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vox romanica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  39 [1980], pp. 64-85) and \softline
Mengaldo ("Dante come critico," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La parola del testo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1 [1997], pp. 36-54).  And for a set of \softline
formulations that attempts to deal with the whole range of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 's revisionism regarding \softline
Dante's poetic precursors, see Barolini, pp. 175-87.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Guittone del Viva, more commonly known as Fra Guittone d'Arezzo, one of \softline
the earliest Italian poets, was born ca. 1240 at Santa Firmina, about two miles from Arezzo.  But \softline
little is known of the details of his life, a great part of which was spent in Florence, where Dante \softline
may have known him.  About the year 1266 Guittone, who was married and had a family, entered \softline
the Order of the Frati Gaudenti [Jovial Friars, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.103].  In 1293 he helped to found \softline
the monastery of Sta. Maria degli Angeli at Florence, in which city he appears to have died in the \softline
following year' (Toynbee, "Guittone" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  Dante, surely unfairly, is \softline
getting even, less perhaps with Guittone than with his admirers, who were many (and continue to \softline
exist today).  It was not enough for him to have Bonagiunta (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.56) include him, along \softline
with himself, among those who failed to come up to Dante's measure.  Now Dante uses the great \softline
Guinizzelli (who had indeed come to dislike Guittone's poetry in reality) to skewer Guittone a \softline
second time, and much more harshly.  As early as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (e.g., I.xiii.1; II.vi.8) \softline
Dante had been deprecating Guittone.  One may sense a certain 'anxiety of influence' at work \softline
here, especially since Guittone did so many of the things that Dante himself took on as his own \softline
tasks: love lyrics, moral }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzoni}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and eventually religious poems. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab On Dante's rejection of Guittone see Contini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Un' idea di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: Einaudi, 1976]), \softline
pp. 60-61, the contributions of Gorni, Antonelli, and Mazzoni in the volume devoted to studies of \softline
Guittone edited by Michelangelo Picone (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Guittone d'Arezzo nel settimo centenario della morte: \softline
Atti del Convegno Internazionale di Arezzo [22-24 aprile 1994]}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. M. Picone [Florence: \softline
Franco Cesati, 1995], pp. 307-83), and Barolini ("Guittone's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ora parr{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Doglia mi reca}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 's Anatomy of Desire," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Seminario Dantesco Internazionale: Atti del primo \softline
convegno tenutosi al Chauncey Conference Center, Princeton, 21-23 ottobre 1994}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Z. G. \softline
Baranski [Florence: Le Lettere, 1997], pp. 3-23).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido's request speaks now of a better kind of poetry, the Lord's Prayer, that \softline
this other poet can offer in his name in Heaven.  He concludes by suggesting an 'edit' in the text, \softline
namely of that part which speaks of leading not into temptation and delivering from evil (Matthew \softline
6:13; Luke 11:4).  Similarly, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.19-24 the penitents }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 do}{\plain \fs24 \f1  sing this part of the text, but \softline
only on behalf of their earthly brethren, since it no longer pertains to them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido's departure reminds the reader that those who speak with Dante need to \softline
come to the edge of the flame, without leaving it, in order to be visible (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.13-15).  \softline
His disappearance back into the flames like a fish from the surface of a pond recombines images \softline
of fire and water, as did his opening sally to Dante, in which he speaks of his thirst, while he burns \softline
in flame, to know of a living man's reason for being here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 137-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Why does Dante now, in a canto composed of so much direct address, shift into \softline
indirect discourse?  Steiner, glossing these lines, was perhaps the first commentator to note that \softline
the style of the remark is 'elegant and studied in form,' as befits a discussion with Arnaut or any \softline
Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al poet, all of whose verse is similarly ornate.  But Steiner does not remark upon the use \softline
of indirect discourse }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 per se}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , nor does any other commentator.  In fact, Dante had already \softline
employed it in describing his oath to Guido (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.104-105).  A desire for stylistic \softline
variation may explain his choice, or there may be a more interesting reason that has escaped us.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 140-147.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That Arnaut's speech forms a little Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al poem eight lines in length may \softline
reflect, according to Nathaniel Smith ("Arnaut Daniel in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Dante's Ambivalence \softline
toward Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  98 [1980]), pp. 101-2, the fact that this was generally a favored \softline
stanza length for Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al poets and indeed of six of the eleven Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al poems cited by Dante \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Smith also demonstrates that Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pastiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al lyric is \softline
wider than an imitation of Arnaut, and reflects numerous other poems and poets in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lingua \softline
d'oc}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  He also comments on the deliberate 'dumbing down' of Dante's version of Arnaut's language \softline
(recognized by its difficult and elliptical style) in which almost every word of this invented poem \softline
has an obvious Italian (or Latin) cognate (pp. 106-7).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is interesting to consider that both the first and last lines of Arnaut's poem contain fairly \softline
obvious imitations of lines of two other notable vernacular poets.  The first, as has been noted by \softline
commentators, first by Chimenz (comm. to these verses), is meant to recall the first line of a \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Folco di Marsilia, the last vernacular poet to appear in the poem and the most highly \softline
placed, the only one seen in paradise (he is named at  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.94).  Dante cites the opening line of \softline
one of his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzoni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as being among the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 illustres}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (i.e., components of the 'illustrious vernacular' that \softline
his treatise champions) in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.vi.6): 'Tan m'abellis l'amoros pensamen' (So \softline
pleases me the very thought of love).  Arnaut's opening line derives from Folco's.  And the same is \softline
true of his closing verse, derived, as Mario Marti indicates (in his edition, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Poeti del Dolce stil \softline
nuovo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1969] -- note to verse 7 of Cino's poem numbered 64), from Cino \softline
da Pistoia: 'e sovverrebbe a voi del mio dolore' of which 'sovenha vos a temps de ma dolor' \softline
(remember, when the time is fit, my pain) is a fairly close Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al translation.  If we are \softline
supposed to notice these redoings, are we also supposed to consider a new side to the daring and \softline
flashy Arnaut, now content to borrow from his fellows?  And they are particularly good ones, \softline
Folco, already in Heaven, and the Cino who has had, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 imprimatur}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as fellow \softline
poet of Beatrice.  (For a speculative treatment of Cino's absence from the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , based on 
the hypothesis that he was indeed originally intended to be the last modern poet included in the \softline
poem at the center of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a plan that was discarded once Dante became aware that Cino \softline
had deserted the imperial cause and, surely worse, joined with his Florentine enemies sometime \softline
after the death of Henry VII in 1313, see Hollander ["Dante and Cino da Pistoia," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
110 (1992)], pp. 215-19.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Arnaut, like Guido, is now more interested in salvation than in dazzling the world with \softline
verse.  These are penitential moments, not ones that encourage thoughts of emulous poetic \softline
striving.  Giacalone (comm. to vv. 139-147) says it this way: 'The poet of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 trobar clus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , who \softline
was ever at the ready to make his poems "concealing," now at the end conceals himself, but in the \softline
penitential fire.'  There seems no question but that Dante was staggered by Arnaut's virtuosity; \softline
and surely we were staggered, in turn, by Dante's perhaps most virtuosic versification, heavily \softline
indebted to Arnaut, found in the last cantos of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  But now there is no dwelling on the \softline
excellence of poetic technique, but rather on prayer and hopes for the joys of Heaven.  Guido's \softline
last words (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.92-93), which seem to imply that, unlike Dante, he came to God }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in \softline
his poetry but even in spite of it, and Arnaut's Proven{\f2\u231\'e7}al stanza, which also speaks to life rather \softline
than to art, are matched by Dante's own 'sweet new style' here, singing of salvation, the subject it \softline
took this poet some time to find again after his first attempt in the concluding chapter of his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita \softline
nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  In this sense Guido's words about prayer as poem and Arnaut's poem, which is a request \softline
for prayer, posthumously join these two poets to Dante's new style, a poetry in tune with God.\par
}}