{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 19}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante apparently believed that the rays of the moon, in Dante's time considered a \softline
'cold planet' (e.g., by Jacopo della Lana [comm. to these verses]), enhanced the natural nocturnal \softline
cooling of the earth, its temperature further decreased whenever another 'cold' planet, Saturn, was \softline
visible above the horizon.  The hour is just before dawn on Tuesday, the beginning of Dante's \softline
third day at the antipodes.  For an earlier Dantean reference to the coldness of Saturn see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.xiii.25.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The early commentators who deal with the problems encountered here are in fairly \softline
close accord.  Beginning with Benvenuto da Imola they indicate the following: geomancers are \softline
diviners who create charts based on random points on the earth's surface and drawn in the sand \softline
(and later copied onto paper or in sand on a tabletop) that can be linked in such a way, by joining \softline
various of these points with lines, to create a number of figures (Daniello [comm. to these verses], \softline
following Landino, names sixteen of these).  The facts behind the passage seem to be pretty much \softline
as Grandgent, glossing it, said: ''Geomancers' foretold the future by means of figures constructed \softline
on points that were distributed by chance.  Their specialty was the selection of favorable spots for \softline
burial.  They were the first in Europe to use the compass.  One of their figures, called }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 fortuna \softline
major}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , or 'greater fortune,' resembled a combination of the last stars of Aquarius and the first of \softline
Pisces.  As these constellations immediately precede Aries, in which the sun is from March 21 to \softline
April 21, the figure in question can be seen in the east shortly before sunrise at that season.'  Their \softline
name, geomancer, reflects the fact that such an adept draws his figures in the sand (or earth -- \softline
Greek }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ge}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) and that he is a diviner (Greek }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mantis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  The configuration known as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Fortuna maior}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is \softline
illustrated by Benvenuto and others as shown here:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab * *\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab     \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab * *\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab * *\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 These stars are found in the east of the pre-dawn sky, shortly before the sun rises in Aquarius in \softline
the spring, since the last stars in Aquarius and the first in Pisces are visible in the hour before \softline
dawn.  Some commentators insist that all six stars are found either in Aquarius or in Pisces alone, \softline
but others object (e.g., Chiavacci Leonardi [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Milan: \softline
Mondadori, 1994)], p. 556, countering the first of these proposals).  For the Christological \softline
resonance of Pisces (another reason to accept the early commentators' view that the stars are not \softline
found in Pisces alone?) see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.19-21.  This passage may lie behind Chaucer's \softline
setting for the heroine's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 aubade}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (dawn song) in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Troilus and Criseyde}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.1422-1442, spoken while \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Fortuna Major}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was rising in the east (III.1420).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Whatever the precise nature of the practices of geomancers, it seems clear that Dante has \softline
not taken six lines to indicate that the time was shortly before dawn without purpose.  Surely the \softline
unpleasant and unsavory connotations of coldness and of divination (we remember the treatment \softline
of diviners in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX) color our reception of the dream that shortly follows.  We should also \softline
remember that this dream occurs on the Terrace of Sloth, thus suggesting that it may reflect \softline
Dante's own former tardiness in seeking the good.  Insofar as that affliction also encouraged his \softline
involvement in cupidity, the dream may also look back to some sort of misdirected love.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  }{\plain \fs24 \f1 This second Purgatorial dream is at least as difficult to interpret as the first (see the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.19).  For a brief and cogent review of Classical, scriptural, patristic, and \softline
Scholastic views of the nature of dreams see Peter Armour ("Divining the Figures: Dante's Three \softline
Dreams in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Melbourne Essays in Italian Language and Literature in Memory \softline
of Colin McCormick}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Tom O'Neill [Dublin: Irish Academic Press, 1990]), pp. 13-16. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Small seas of ink have been poured out in the quest for the source and meaning of this \softline
unpleasant woman.  The far from convincing results previously obtained probably should warn \softline
anyone against advancing an opinion.  On the other hand, it seems to some that the problem is \softline
easier to understand than are the attempts to solve it.  The poem itself, in the words of Virgil, tells \softline
us precisely who the stammering woman is: she represents the conjoined sins of excessive love, \softline
avarice, gluttony, lust -- the sins of the flesh or, in the language of Dante's first }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the sins of \softline
incontinence.  (See Virgil's words at vv. 58-59: 'saw... that ancient witch / who alone is purged \softline
with tears above us here.')  Dante's dream, nonetheless, must surely also have specific meaning for \softline
him.  If the woman is the object of his affection, she must have particular reference to lust, since \softline
the poem nowhere offers any indication that Dante considered himself ever to have been \softline
avaricious (or prodigal, for that matter) or gluttonous.  The 'good that fails to make men happy' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.133), in Dante's case, must then nearly certainly be understood as involving wrongful \softline
sexual desire.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Consideration of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 femmina balba}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (stammering woman) has caused readers to seek out \softline
some fairly recondite sources.  Giuseppe Toffanin ("La 'foetida Aethiopissa' e la 'femmina balba,'" \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  77 [1921], pp. 147-49) argued for a foul female \softline
creature described in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vitae patrum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; Francesco Mazzoni (ed., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Divina Commedia: \softline
Purgatorio.  Con I commenti di T. Casini/S.A. Barbi & A. Momigliano}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, \softline
1977]), p. 436, presented still another potential source, an apparently fair but actually foul woman \softline
described in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tabula exemplorum secundum ordinem alphabeti}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  The common problem for \softline
these 'sources' is that we have no evidence indicating that they were known to Dante. }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  }{\plain \fs24 \f1 In recent \softline
years still other recondite candidacies have been put forward: Paolo Cherchi ("Per la 'femmina \softline
balba,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1985], pp. 228-32) urges that of Bernard of Gordon, author of \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lilium medicinae}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , but admits that proving Dante's knowledge of this text or even \softline
acquaintance with the interesting passage that he cites from it (p. 230) in some other source is \softline
problematic; Michelangelo Picone ("L'Ovidio di Dante," in A. Iannucci, ed., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la "bella \softline
scola" della poesia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1993]), p. 134, reaches out for the nasty widow of Ovid's \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vetula}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; Giovanni Parenti ("Ercole al bivio e il sogno della femmina balba," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Operosa parva \softline
per Gianni Antonini}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. D. De Robertis & F. Gavazzeni [Verona: Valdonega, 1996], pp. 57-66) \softline
investigates possible resonances of various potential sources, including (pp. 55-59) the theme of \softline
Hercules at the crossroads found in Cicero (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De officiis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.118) and (pp. 61-62) the 'idols of the \softline
gentiles' found in a Psalm certainly known well by Dante, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 In exitu}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Psalm 113B:4-7).  For a \softline
more general analysis of the passage containing the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 femmina balba}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Dino Cervigni (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's \softline
Poetry of Dreams}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1986]), pp. 123-35.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab What has rarely been noted in modern commentaries (but see Mattalia [comm. to verse 7] \softline
and, citing him, Giacalone [comm. to vv. 25-27]) is the fact that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 balbus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is the contrary of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 planus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
the word that describes Beatrice's speech in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.56 (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.56-57).  Cf. the \softline
entry }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 balbus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in Lewis and Short's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Latin Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , where this view is confirmed.  And see \softline
Cicero, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De oratore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.lxi.260), where stammering (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 balbus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) Demosthenes labored so assiduously \softline
to correct himself in the pronunciation of initial 'r' that no one could eventually be considered to 
pronounce it more clearly (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 planius}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) than he.  For the 'higher' meaning of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 planus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see the Codice \softline
Cassinese (at verse 56): 'sermo divinus suavis et planus esse debet' (divine speech should be \softline
smooth and clear).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The woman, we learn from the preceding tercet, stammers, is crooked in her \softline
glance as well as in her extremities, and sickly in her complexion.  That is her natural condition.  \softline
Dante, in the logic of the dream, redresses each of these sets of flaws, making her speech fluent, \softline
straightening her limbs, and making her facial complexion the color that love desires to find in a \softline
woman (commentators debate whether this is red or white, but only since the time of Tommaseo \softline
[the early commentators do not treat the question]; Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 13-15) opts for the \softline
darker hue (purple, red); Bianchi, citing }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXVI.1, where the 'color of love' is the \softline
pallor Dante finds in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the woman who replaces dead Beatrice in his affections, \softline
chooses the lighter: white.  Since then, there has been continuing dispute, which is easily enough \softline
understood, since the ugly nature of the woman has been characterized by her 'sickly pale \softline
complexion,' given the fact that this has obviously been changed under Dante's sun-like gaze.  As \softline
a result, many commentators think her color must have been the rosy red of sexual excitement.  \softline
But Dante's own earlier insistence on the white complexion that is the 'color of love' surely \softline
supports Bianchi's view: From an unpleasant sickly pallor (i.e., a loss of whiteness, as the hapax \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scialba}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in verse 9 suggests, from the Latin }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 exalbare}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , here meaning 'unwhitened' [see Poletto, \softline
comm. to vv. 1-9]), the skin of the woman's face turns to the elegant paleness of a lady who \softline
draws the affection of her beholder.  This is not the color of passion in her, but the color which \softline
causes passion in a male beholder (a male might indeed not think her a 'lady' were her face aglow \softline
with passion; one may make love to 'women,' one falls in love with 'ladies').  While the \softline
commentators remain divided, opting for a shade of red, a whiteness, or a combination of the two \softline
(all of which may be found in the lengthy tradition of the 'colors of love,' at least from Ovid \softline
onward), the context of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which sponsors pallor as the 'color of love,' supports only the \softline
second possibility.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That Dante's glance has transformed her may further suggest that the song which \softline
she sings is, in some sense, of his composition also, as was the tempting song sung by Casella \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.112), the second }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  included in Dante's}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , addressed to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
(and not to Beatrice).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the view that the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 femmina balba}{\plain \fs24 \f1  reflects not only the potentially various flesh-and-blood ladies of Dante's sexual transgressions but also the}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see \softline
Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969], pp. \softline
136-44, 162-63).  It seems more likely that Dante here means to refer to the first and carnal lady \softline
for whom he betrayed Beatrice, the lady of the last section of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the lady who, he later \softline
claimed, was only an allegory for the unchallengeably virtuous Lady Philosphy.  Thus the main \softline
thrust of his self-correction is aimed at the straying recorded in the earlier work; but, naturally \softline
enough, it would also hold in contempt that later allegorized lady as well, also presented as an \softline
'enemy' of Beatrice in the first three treatises of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Both move the lover from affection for \softline
his true beloved in service of one far less worthy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Joseph Mazzeo (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medieval Cultural Tradition in Dante's "Comedy"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ithaca: Cornell \softline
University Press, 1960]), pp. 205-12, had already suggested that the Sirens are to be considered \softline
as being related to philosophical misadventure on Dante's part.  His argument is not accepted by 
Mazzoni ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XXXI,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, \softline
1965]), p. 66n., who believes that the context allows us to understand that only a carnal \softline
concupiscence is the object of scrutiny here.  However, the way the mind loves its 'lady' may have \softline
seemed to Dante an even more important form of affective behavior than sexuality.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the inverse relation between the Siren's way of naming herself 'io son, io son dolce \softline
serena' (I am, I am the sweet siren) and Beatrice's: 'ben son, ben son Beatrice' (I am, indeed I am \softline
Beatrice [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.73]) and their possible connection to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tetragrammaton}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the two sets of \softline
two Hebrew letters (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ia ia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) that make up the ninth of the names of God assembled by Isidore of \softline
Seville (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etymol}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.i.16), see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1969]), p. 144n.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the biblical references to sirens (Isaiah 13:21; Job 30:29-30; Isaiah 34:13; Jeremiah \softline
50:39, Micah 1:8), see Lino Pertile ("Ulisse, Guido e le sirene," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  65 [2000]), p. \softline
107n.  And, for patristic references to them, see pp. 107-14.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 20-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrasing that expresses the Siren's power over men may put us in mind of the \softline
condition of Dante in the opening verses of the poem, when he, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nel mezzo del cammin}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , was off his \softline
course and resembled a sailor who had nearly drowned.  Does he now see himself as having been \softline
seduced by a 'siren'?  Insofar as the she-wolf represents the sins of Incontinence, and thus, for \softline
Dante, lust (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.32-54), the essential reason for his having lost the true way \softline
would now seem to be predominantly related to his sexual affections.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A tormented tercet: what does }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vago}{\plain \fs24 \f1  mean? to whom or what does it refer? who is \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 serena}{\plain \fs24 \f1  who claims so to have held Ulysses' attention?  As Barbi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Problemi di critica dantesca}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Florence: Sansoni, 1934]), p. 228, maintained, in this poem the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vago}{\plain \fs24 \f1  always (it is used \softline
13 other times) means }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 bramoso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (desirous of) and is, as here, used with the genitive (cf. }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVIII.1).  (See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.52, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.3, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.13, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.104, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.84, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXIV.40, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.106, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.1, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.135, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.34, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.14, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXIII.13, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXI.33.)  Thus, while the commentators are divided roughly evenly, with more \softline
early ones opting for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vago}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as modifying }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cammin}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (and meaning 'wandering, indirect'), and more \softline
modern ones, beginning with Torraca (comm. to these lines), believing that it modifies Ulysses \softline
(and means 'eager'), one is more likely to be convinced, as was Giuseppina Mezzadroli ("Dante, \softline
Boezio e le sirene," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lingua e stile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  25 [1990]), p. 29, that the context and Dante's general practice \softline
allow us to resolve the first two questions as did Barbi (this woman drew Ulysses from the \softline
journey he was so eager to pursue).  (For a lengthy treatment of the word, Karlheinz Stierle \softline
["}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Canto III," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  19 (2002)], p 75n., refers the reader to A. Noyer-Weidner, \softline
"Standortbestimmung zum Gebrauch eines 'echt italienischen Wortes' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 (vago}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) bei Dante und \softline
Petrarca," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Umgang mit Texten}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , I [Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 1986], pp. 169-92.)  But what of \softline
this 'siren' who so beguiled Ulysses?  Commentators have at times forgotten that Dante did not \softline
know Homer's account (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Odyssey}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.39-200) of Ulysses' escape from the Sirens' seductive wiles.  \softline
(One of them, Benvenuto [comm. to vv. 16-24] , perhaps flaunting his newly gained acquaintance \softline
with the newly translated Homeric epics, suggests that Calypso is the siren referred to here; \softline
Padoan ["La 'serena' dell'Ulisse dantesco (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX 19-24)," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il pio Enea e l'empio Ulisse: \softline
Tradizione classica e intendimento medievale in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Ravenna: Longo, 1977 [1960]), pp. 200-4], encouraged by Benvenuto, also hears this ill-heard echo.)  We should probably understand, 
following Edward Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Scripture and Classical Authors in \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 (1896)]) that, from Cicero's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De finibus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.xviii.48-49, Dante \softline
decided that Ulysses had indeed been tempted by the Sirens.  (In this vein see Hollander \softline
["}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX: Dante's Siren/Harpy," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Petrarch, Boccaccio: Studies in Honor of \softline
Charles S. Singleton}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Aldo S. Bernardo and Anthony L. Pellegrini (Binghamton, NY: \softline
Medieval & Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1983), pp. 80-83]; Giuseppina Mezzadroli ["Dante, \softline
Boezio e le sirene," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lingua e stile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  25 (1990), pp. 30-32]; and Lloyd Howard [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Formulas of \softline
Repetition in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2001), pp. 139-41]).  In any case, that is how he has the Siren portray Ulysses, and he offers no textual support \softline
for any other view.  He also probably had in mind, as Moore indeed indicated, the passage near \softline
the opening of Boethius's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Consolation of Philosophy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.i[pr]) that has Lady Philosophy ordering \softline
the 'sweet Sirens' to be gone from the presence of Boethius and leave him to the care of her better \softline
'Muses' (perhaps first noted by Tommaseo [comm. to vv. 19-21]).  Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX: \softline
Dante's Siren/Harpy," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Petrarch, Boccaccio: Studies in Honor of Charles S. Singleton}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
ed. Aldo S. Bernardo and Anthony L. Pellegrini [Binghamton, NY: Medieval & Renaissance \softline
Texts and Studies, 1983]), p. 82, also notes the closeness of Dante's description of the Sirens to \softline
that found in Isidore of Seville (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etymol}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.iii.30-31).  Pertile ("Ulisse, Guido e le sirene," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi \softline
Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  65 [2000], pp. 101-18) attempting to demonstrate that the Christian tradition of \softline
Ulysses (which sees him positively, as the man who could withstand the Sirens, i.e., sensual and \softline
intellectual temptation) stands behind Dante's treatment of the hero, somehow fails to deal with \softline
the fact that in Dante Ulysses is portrayed precisely as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 failing}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to resist such temptation.  For that \softline
matter, in Beatrice's later opinion, Dante himself is seen in exactly the same light, namely as \softline
yielding to the temptation of the Sirens when he withdrew his attention from her in order to fall \softline
under the spell of another lady or ladies (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.43-48).  Picone ("Canto XIX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura \softline
Dantis Turicensis: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, \softline
2001], pp. 287-306) has done a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 lectura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the canto that is almost entirely dedicated to the \softline
Ulyssean motifs found in it.  For an attempt to reassess in a balanced way Dante's treatment of \softline
Ulysses, see Patrick Boyde (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Human Vices and Human Worth in Dante's "Comedy"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: \softline
Cambridge University Press, 2000], Chapter 10, "The worth and vices of Ulysses: a case-study," \softline
pp. 231-72).  It is worth noting that at least one early commentator, the anonymous author of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 chiose sincrone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in a manuscript from Montecassino (the Codice Cassinese, general ote to this \softline
canto), also believes, as Dante appears to, that the Sirens were found at sea.  He claims as much \softline
on the authority of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 figmenta poetarum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the fables of the poets.  But see Hollander \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX: Dante's Siren/Harpy," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Petrarch, Boccaccio: Studies in Honor of \softline
Charles S. Singleton}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Aldo S. Bernardo and Anthony L. Pellegrini [Binghamton, NY: \softline
Medieval & Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1983]), pp. 82-83, for a possible source in a poet \softline
quite familiar to Dante, Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.552-563), who gives the Sirens wings so that they may \softline
fly over the sea in their search for Proserpina.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab A number of commentators have believed, from the earliest days onward, that Dante \softline
confusedly considered Circe (to whom he has the Greek adventurer advert as his seductress in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVI.91-92) one of the Sirens.  He clearly knows better than that.  On the other hand, he also \softline
may be building his own version of Ulysses' biography, as he has already done in inventing the last \softline
voyage in the earlier passage, and now includes an interlude that adds another to the single \softline
'canonical' and Circean divagation in yet another example of Ulyssean turning.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 26-27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Attempting to identify this lady, Fedele Romani (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il canto XIX del "Purgatorio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[("Lectura Dantis Orsanmichele") Florence: Sansoni, 1902]), pp. 15-18, one hundred years ago \softline
opted for Beatrice, but has had few followers.  Gioacchino Paparelli ({\u8220\'93}}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Canto XIX,{\u8221\'94} in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Scaligera}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1967]), p. 717, reviewing the question, adds a \softline
piece of evidence for those who think the lady is Beatrice: as Lucy, introduced along with \softline
Beatrice in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II, is central to the first dream in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX, so Beatrice, introduced to the \softline
poem in that same passage, operates in the second dream as its morally central character.  \softline
However, Paparelli continues, the fact that Dante does not recognize her simply voids this \softline
interpretation.  Perhaps Paparelli (and many another who follows this line of argument) does not \softline
take into sufficient account the fact that this scene is presented }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 as a dream}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , i.e., a 'text' that \softline
requires interpretation in order to be understood.  In this formulation it is essential that Beatrice \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  be presented as herself, but as being discoverable from her qualities.  If one wanted to cite a \softline
single passage that reveals the convoluted and implausible arguments of those who seek another \softline
solution for the problem, Paparelli's discussion (pp. 714-29), which ends up opting for 'Justice' as \softline
this lady's identity, would serve admirably.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Among more recent proponents of Beatrice's candidacy see Poletto (comm. to vv. 25-27), \softline
who clearly prefers her as best fitting what happens in the poem, while ultimately not being quite \softline
certain; Carroll (comm. to vv. 25-33), although he is still more tentative than Poletto and, indeed, \softline
eventually prefers an unlikely choice, Matelda (whom we will meet in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII); Vandelli \softline
(comm. to vv. 26-33); and Giacalone (comm. to vv. 25-27), who offers the fullest and best \softline
defense of Beatrice as being the lady in question.  And see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), pp. 141-44, who strongly supports \softline
this view.  Giuseppe Mazzotta (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Vision and the Circle of Knowledge}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1993], p. 145) and ({\u8220\'93}Il sogno della Sirena [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX],{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il sogno \softline
raccontato: Atti del convegno internazionale di Rende (12-14 novembre 1992)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a cura di N. \softline
Merola and C. Verbaro [Vibo Valentia: Monteleone, 1995], p. 127) also believes that this lady in \softline
Dante's dream is Beatrice.  And see Picone ("Canto XIX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis Turicensis: \softline
Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Georges G{\f2\u252\'fc}ntert and Michelangelo Picone [Florence: Cesati, 2001], pp. 287-306) \softline
for a similar view.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   If this is Beatrice, then it is hardly surprising that she would recognize Virgil, in \softline
the dreamer's estimation, since he knows from what he was told in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.53 that Beatrice \softline
came to Virgil in Limbo.  And as for the identity of the lady here, characterized as being 'onesta' \softline
(virtuous), it is probably worth remembering that Beatrice is later compared to a 'donna onesta' \softline
(chaste lady) in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.31.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   What is the subject of the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 prendea}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (seized)?  Some have argued that it is the \softline
holy lady.  A sense of grammatical structure indicates, instead, that it is Virgil, subject of the \softline
previous verb (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ven{\f3 \'58}a}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [came forward]) that is in parallel with it.  Further, if the lady indeed \softline
represents Beatrice, it would be highly unlikely that she would do the dirty work herself.  Just as \softline
she, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II, called on Virgil to make Dante aware of the foulness of the sins punished in \softline
hell, so now she stands to one side while Virgil reveals the noxious nature of her rival, the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 femmina balba}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The stench that arises from the naked belly of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 femmina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has, according to Hollander \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX: Dante's Siren/Harpy," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Petrarch, Boccaccio: Studies in Honor of 
Charles S. Singleton}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Aldo S. Bernardo and Anthony L. Pellegrini [Binghamton, NY: \softline
Medieval & Renaissance Texts and Studies, 1983]), pp. 84-86, a familiar source, not one that \softline
must be sought in out-of-the-way medieval treatises (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIX.7-9), but in \softline
Virgil's description of the Harpies in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.216-218, as was suggested by a student at \softline
Princeton, Carl Frankel '70, in 1968: 'virginei volucrum vultus, foedissima ventris / proluvies, \softline
uncaeque manus, et pallida semper / ora fame' (maidenly of countenance, yet winged; most foul \softline
the discharge of their bellies; their hands taloned; their faces always pale with hunger).  The \softline
particular similarity of the stinking bellies of Dante's Siren and Virgil's Harpies is surely striking.  \softline
A further similarity lies in the purpose both creatures have in the works that contain them, which \softline
is to draw the hero away from his task, whether from proceeding to Italy or from pursuing \softline
Beatrice to a destination in Christ.  In this sense both are counselors of despair.  In Dante's case, it \softline
is his duty to confess that he himself had created, out of what should have been repulsive, what he \softline
came to worship; out of a Harpy he had formed a Siren.  Unlike Ulysses' Siren, Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 femme \softline
fatale}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is not even beautiful to begin with.  It is no wonder that she will be brought back into play \softline
in his worst moment of guilt in the entire poem when he is censured by Beatrice in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXXI.43-48, warning him not to be lured by the 'Sirens' ever again.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-35. }{\plain \fs24 \f1  In Dante's 'Surgi e vieni' (Arise and come), Mattalia (comm. to verse 35) seems to \softline
have been the first commentator (and few have subsequently joined him) to hear what is clearly a \softline
biblical echo, even if his hearing is a little dull.  He cites Matthew 9:5-6, where Jesus urges the \softline
paralyzed man to walk; perhaps more applicable is Matthew 26:36-46, where Jesus three times \softline
leaves his disciples in Gethsemane in order to pray in a place apart and three times comes back to \softline
find them sleeping, finally arousing them with 'Surgite, eamus' (Rise, let us be going), for His \softline
betrayal (by Judas) is at hand.  The rhythm of those three disheartening visits to those who should \softline
have been awake is preserved in Dante's 'Three times at least I've called you,' as was suggested in \softline
1969 by two undergraduate students at Princeton, John Adams and Christopher McElroy.  Lost in \softline
his dream, Dante is like the disciples who sleep while their Lord suffers alone.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante has slept late, unsurprisingly, given his late-night activities on the Terrace of \softline
Sloth (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.76-78), and now finds the sun, at his back, risen above the horizon.  For his \softline
posture Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 40-42) suggest the similitude of a broken supporting pier of \softline
a bridge (and thus }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 only}{\plain \fs24 \f1  half an arch) rather than that of one of the two halves of a pointed arch, as \softline
proposed by others, since pointed arches were rarely found as features of medieval bridges.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Whatever the architectural model, the protagonist is obviously concerned about the meaning of \softline
his dream.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Angel of Zeal's words ('Come, here is the passage') may not be like any heard \softline
here on earth, but they do resemble those spoken by Beatrice when she was described by Virgil as \softline
being 'soave e piana' (gentle and clear) in her speech (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.56), as Poletto (comm. to vv. 40-45) \softline
suggested.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab As for the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 marca}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , commentators point out that it is of feudal (Carolingian) origin, \softline
and referred to the borderline that a lord established for his terrain; in Dante's use of the extended \softline
sense of the word (which had come simply to mean 'region') there may reside some sense of the \softline
original term: our earth is like a small fiefdom when compared with God's kingdom.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Perhaps this only reference to a particular bird as being similar to a welcoming \softline
angel includes swan-like features because of the avian characteristics of the Siren that it \softline
intrinsically counters.  The soft wings of the angel also stand in sharp contrast to the rocky sides \softline
of the narrow passage upward, framing these, as it were.  Some commentators argue that this \softline
angel opens its wings in order to point the way to the passage; since its voice has already done so, \softline
this seems an unnecessary precision.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The nine verses devoted to the presence of the angel here represent the briefest \softline
scene yet devoted to the interplay between angel and mortal (but see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.1-6).  \softline
The Beatitude referred to, Matthew 5:4 (5:5 in the Vulgate), 'Blessed are they that mourn, for \softline
they shall be comforted,' has caused some to wonder what specific relevance these words have to \softline
those formerly guilty of Sloth.  Federigo Tollemache, "beatitudini evangeliche" (ED.1970.1), p. \softline
540b, explains that, given Thomas Aquinas's definition (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ST}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.ii.35.2) of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 accidia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tristitia de \softline
spirituali bono}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (dejection over one's spiritual health), the phrase 'qui lugent' (those who mourn) is \softline
relevant.  For the program of the Beatitudes in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.110.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The exchange clearly reflects that between Virgil and Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XV.120-126.  Once again Virgil begins by asking Dante 'che hai?' (what's wrong?), not at first \softline
understanding his charge's removal from present reality.  Once again Dante insists on his other-mindedness.  In the first instance Virgil quickly understood that Dante was having a visionary \softline
experience; now he becomes aware that Dante has been having a dream of what his guide's words \softline
had prepared him for, coming to grips with the 'good that fails to make men happy' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XVII.133).  In the first case, Virgil seems to have insisted that he knew what he did not know; \softline
here he seems to have intuited correctly what his charge was dreaming.  Scartazzini (comm. to \softline
verse  58) points out that some texts have question marks following the words 'si piagne' (verse \softline
59) and 'si slega' (verse 60), making what Petrocchi's text records as observations into questions.  \softline
Were we to know that such was indeed the punctuation used by Dante, the hypothesis outlined \softline
above would be supported, i.e., Virgil did not 'see' Dante's dream, but divined it from the \softline
situational context.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab While some of the early commentators are sure that here Virgil only refers to the sin of \softline
Avarice, repented on the next terrace, beginning with Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to vv. 58-63) \softline
others have clearly understood that Virgil is referring to all of the three sins of incontinence he \softline
had described in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVII.133-139.  For a full review of the interpretive problem \softline
represented by the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 antica strega}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Gabriele Muresu ({\u8220\'93}Il richiamo dell{\u8217\'92}antica strega [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XIX]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Rassegna della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  100 [1996], pp. 5-38).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Virgil's formulation causes a problem for those who would argue that the holy lady is \softline
Beatrice, since it generalizes the nature of the lady who opposes the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 femmina balba}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and makes \softline
Dante's dream applicable to all sinners, no others of whom, we may assume, are lovers of \softline
Beatrice.  For this reason Giovanni Parenti's understanding ("Ercole al bivio e il sogno della \softline
femmina balba," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Operosa parva per Gianni Antonini}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. D. De Robertis & F. Gavazzeni \softline
[Verona: Valdonega, 1996]), pp. 62-63 (resuscitating Torraca's opinion [comm. to vv. 25-33]), \softline
that the holy lady equates with Charity, seems the most adequate solution, good love that \softline
operates against the forces of 'the good that fails to make men happy' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.133).  Charity \softline
may well be the general meaning of the lady in the dream; for Dante, however, that theological \softline
virtue is the core of the meaning of Beatrice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-62.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Some commentators take Virgil's exhortation metaphorically, i.e., 'crush the things \softline
of this world under your feet,' but it seems to be literal enough, urging Dante to cease his dreamy \softline
self-absorption and push up (they are on the slope between terraces) and forward with his feet in \softline
order to continue his journey.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 63-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's metaphoric expression and the poet's following simile return to falconry \softline
(see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.127-136), now in as central an image of the basic movement of the \softline
entire poem as may be found.  Mortals look down, consumed by their own concerns while God, \softline
the falconer, wheels his lure (the celestial heavens) around his 'head,' thus drawing us back to \softline
Him.  Dante had been looking at the earth (verse 52) and Virgil urges him to push off against it in \softline
order to move on (verse 61); in the simile the falcon, too, looks down, perhaps to see if he is still \softline
bound to the falconer's wrist now that his hood has been removed (or merely in his habitual \softline
attitude, his head inclined downward, resting on his breast).  Both bird and Dante, urged on, look \softline
up and travel upward, in Dante's case by climbing through the passageway in the rock so that he \softline
may resume his circling of the mountain on his approach to God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The image of the star-filled heavens as God's lures for us, his falcons, is central to the \softline
progress of the poem that concludes each of its }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  with the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stelle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (stars).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's arrival on the fifth terrace, that of Avarice and Prodigality, is immediately \softline
greeted by the sight of those who are purging themselves there, prostrate on the earth.  This \softline
terrace is unique in that it is a stage for three increasingly lengthy conversations, first with a pope \softline
(Adrian V) in this canto, with a kingly figure (Hugh Capet) in the next, and finally with a poet \softline
(Statius) in XXI and XXII, a sample of callings that reflects Dante's most pressing concerns: \softline
Church, empire, and letters.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The penitents' cries, muffled because they lie facedown on the floor of the terrace \softline
and are uttering them through painful sighs, are 'my soul cleaves to the earth' (Psalm 118 \softline
[119]:25).  The Ottimo (comm. to vv. 70-74) connects this confessional outpouring with Virgil's \softline
earlier remark to Dante ('Press your heels / into the ground' [verse 61]), thus suggesting that the \softline
avaricious repent their longing for the things of the earth, exactly what Virgil is urging Dante to \softline
do.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-77.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The terms in which Virgil puts his request may remind us that his own condition in \softline
Limbo lacks precisely what these penitents enjoy: hope in the justice of God for eventual \softline
salvation.  Virgil and the other inhabitants of Limbo long for that justice, but without any possible \softline
hope of achieving it (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.42).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As Singleton (comm. to this verse) observes, this is the first time we learn that some \softline
penitents do not have to spend penitential time on every terrace, since the nameless speaker (we \softline
will learn that he was a pope at verse 99) assumes, from Virgil's request for help, that both of \softline
these newcomers are saved souls exempt from the sin of avarice (or of prodigality) who are \softline
ascending to a destination higher up the mountain without having to stay here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante cannot make out the identity of the speaker, but is able to individuate the \softline
source of the words he has just heard; he seeks Virgil's permission to question him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 86.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cenno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (sign) made by Virgil in assent to Dante's request is apparently either a \softline
facial gesture (a smile?) or an ocular one (a kindly glance?).  He will make a responsive and \softline
welcoming gesture to the shade of Statius in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.15, the nature of which has caused \softline
more puzzlement than this one.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 92.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's circumlocution, 'that without which there is no return to God,' refers to the \softline
satisfaction each penitent must offer to God, showing that he or she is finally pure of the traces of \softline
the defiling sin purged on each terrace.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's three questions will be the basis for this penitent's speech, which will fill \softline
most of the rest of the canto, vv. 97-126 and 142-145.  He wants to know the identity of his \softline
interlocutor, the nature of the sin reflected in his prone posture, and, as is customary, what service \softline
he (as living soul) can perform back on earth for him.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The speaker, in good papal Latin ('Know that I was a successor of Peter'), informs \softline
Dante that he was once a pope, not boastfully, but humbly and ashamedly, as though to say 'I, of \softline
all people, who should have known better.'  Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 97-99) makes a similar \softline
point; it is as though he said he was a successor of Peter 'sed non pauper ut Petrus' (but not a \softline
poor man, as was Peter).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Geographical indications (two towns on the Ligurian coast and the stream taken \softline
by members of the Fieschi family for their title: they are 'counts of Lavagna') leave no doubt as to \softline
the identity of the pope who speaks: 'Adrian V (Ottobuono de' Fieschi of Genoa), elected Pope at \softline
Rome, in succession to Innocent V, July 11, 1276; died at Viterbo on Aug. 16 following, before \softline
he had been crowned' (Toynbee, "Adriano [2]" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concicse Dante Dicitonary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]); thus Dante's 'a \softline
month and little more' to indicate Adrian's term of office.  Longfellow (comm. to verse 99) reports \softline
the following papal remark: 'When his kindred came to congratulate him on his election, he said, \softline
'Would that ye came to a Cardinal in good health, and not to a dying Pope.''\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 104.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI.127-129 for Dante's earlier view of the papacy's descent into \softline
the 'mud' of wrongful activity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Bosco (comm. to vv. 127-138) draws attention to the parallels between the previous \softline
nineteenth canto and this one, both deeply involved with the papacy in both similar and opposed \softline
spirits.  At least here we understand what the papacy might be if the pope were an Adrian V.  It is \softline
perhaps by design that the first saved pope whom we meet in the poem (there will be more [see \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.38-39]) should be distinguished by having died shortly after his election and \softline
thus without having served 'officially' at all.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Adrian's remarks have caused a certain puzzlement, since historical records give \softline
no sense of his involvement in avaricious behavior (nor, consequently, of his turning from that sin \softline
only once he was elected pope); as Scartazzini (comm. to verse 99) observed, such notice derives \softline
only from this passage in Dante's poem and from his perhaps too gullible commentators.  Bosco \softline
("Particolari danteschi," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annali della Reale Scuola Normale di Pisa, Lettere, storia e filosofia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  11 \softline
[1942]), pp. 136-43, followed by Sapegno (comm. to verse 99), argues that Dante thought that \softline
what he had read in John of Salisbury's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Policraticus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VIII.xxiii.814) or, more likely, since 
Petrarch later also made the same mistake, in some (unknown) later source that created this error, \softline
about the twelfth-century pope Adrian IV, concerned instead his thirteenth-century namesake.  \softline
Renucci, cited by Giacalone (comm. to vv. 100-102), has argued that Dante was well acquainted \softline
with John of Salisbury's text and deliberately conflated the two Adrians for reasons of his own.  \softline
Since Dante almost certainly had recourse to John's text, it is difficult to counter Renucci's view, \softline
even if it leaves one wondering why Dante should have wanted to rewrite the life of Adrian V in \softline
this way.  For the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Policraticus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as source of several of Dante's exemplary figures see E.R. Curtius \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , tr. W.R. Trask [New York: Harper & Row, \softline
1963 (1948)]), pp. 364-65; see also Andr{\f2\u233\'e9} P{\f2\u233\'e9}zard ("Du }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Policraticus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  {\f3 \'42} la }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine Com{\f2\u233\'e9}die}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Romania}{\plain \fs24 \f1  70 [1948]), esp. pp. 163-91 (for John of Salisbury's Adrian), and Renucci (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Une source \softline
de Dante, le "Policraticus" de Jean de Salisbury}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Paris: n.p., 1951]).  For the texts in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Policraticus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that are pertinent here, see Singleton (comm. to vv. 99-114).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Conversion here signifies any turning to God.  Even confirmed Christians are likely \softline
to experience a continuing need for 'conversion.'  See Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: \softline
Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)]), pp. 39-56.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-126.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Adrian here answers Dante's second question, why these souls are in the posture \softline
Dante sees them in, by explaining their }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 contrapasso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : since they sought the things of earth \softline
energetically, they now are facedown on that earth and restrained, immobile, upon it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's reverent kneeling before Adrian is apparent from his voice, which \softline
sounds louder because his face is now closer to the recumbent pope's body.  The interruption in \softline
Adrian's answers allows this little exchange that offers a lesson in fellowship that trumps Dante's \softline
gesture of respect.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 131.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Adrian earns one of Dante's relatively few uses of the honorific 'voi' (see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.49-51).  In the first }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  only Farinata, Cavalcante, and Brunetto have this honor \softline
bestowed upon them.  Adrian, the fourth of seven to share the honor, will be joined only by \softline
Guinizzelli (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.112) and Beatrice (first at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.36) in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and then by \softline
Cacciaguida (first at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.10) in the next.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Adrian's response is so urgent that he only gets to his fraternal salute, nearly always \softline
found, elsewhere in the poem, at the beginning of direct address and never at its end, last.  His \softline
'frate,' rhyming with 'dignitate,' is the answer to the hierarchy underlined by that second term and \softline
by Dante's kneeling.  In God's kingdom there is no specialness, only brotherhood of the equally \softline
special.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a survey of the presence of the address 'frate' in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.127.  There are twenty occurrences of the word, when used to address another, in \softline
the poem, the first in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.109, where Dante addresses the Jovial Friars rather nastily, \softline
the last in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.61, where Benedict addresses Dante, who is saluted a total of seventeen \softline
times in this way.  Only Forese Donati (twice) and Beatrice (four times) are permitted to use this \softline
form of address more than once.  In the last two }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the only addressee other than Dante is \softline
Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.131), in Virgil's humble and warm disclaimer of a respect similar, on Statius's \softline
part, to that displayed here by Dante for Adrian.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 134-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   From the time of Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 133-138) it has been understood \softline
that this scene clearly replays a similar scene in the Bible: Revelation 19:9-10, where the angel \softline
addresses John, commanding him to write of the blessedness of those who share the marriage \softline
supper of the Lamb.  When John falls before the feet of the angel to worship him, the angel says: \softline
'You must not do that; I am your fellow-servant (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 conservus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).'  Dante's hapax, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 conservo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , surely \softline
cements the relationship between the two texts.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The next biblical reference is to Matthew 22:23-30, 'neque nubent' (nor do they \softline
marry), a passage in which Christ deals with the sardonic and hairsplitting Sadducees, who do not \softline
believe in resurrection and who wish, cynically, to know which of six brothers, who had in turn \softline
married an eldest brother's widow, would be her resurrected husband.  Jesus answers them by \softline
saying that after the Resurrection there will be no marrying in Heaven, where all will share, one \softline
might add, in the marriage supper of the Lamb as equals, where all are married to all and to none.  \softline
Adrian's insistence on the lack of hierarchical distinction is his version of Jesus' saying.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'That of which you spoke' refers to Dante's previous understanding (verse 92) of \softline
Adrian's desire to complete his penance and thus achieve purification.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142-145.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Answering the third element in Dante's question, regarding what Dante might \softline
do for him, Adrian can supply only the name of a niece, Alagia, who might pray for him, thus \softline
suggesting that his avaricious former life had much in the way of familial bad company among all \softline
the rest of his relatives.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Alagia was married to Moroello Malaspina, with whom Dante was on friendly terms, and \softline
thus his good words about her probably reflect a positive impression gained from personal \softline
knowledge and may also serve to express gratitude for the Malaspina family's hospitality in \softline
Lunigiana in the early years of Dante's exile.\par
}}