{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 32}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante would seem to be looking back in time, seeing Beatrice now, in 1300, as she \softline
was in Florence in 1290 (the year in which she died).  That his eyes are so 'fixed' will be noted by \softline
the theological virtues at verse 9 -- and not with approval.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab This is the longest canto in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For consideration of the various lengths of \softline
Dante's cantos, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.28-32.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The love that Dante feels now for Beatrice is described in terms that indicate its \softline
'Carthaginian' dimension.  The 'antica rete' (old, familiar net) reminds us of the 'antica fiamma' \softline
(ancient flame -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.48) that flared in Dido and then in Dante, Dido's words become his \softline
own.  Dante's morals may have been cleansed on the mountain, and Lethe may have made him \softline
forget his now forgiven sins, but his intellect is surely not working at its highest level.  Having \softline
seen Beatrice as God loves her, he still contrives to think she is that pretty girl from Florence.  \softline
The poet records her 'holy smile'; the protagonist remembers his earthly feelings.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rete}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (net) was used in the last canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.63) to denote the instrument \softline
with which a hunter catches birds (as a girl [or girls] caught incautious Dante, according to \softline
Beatrice), and may also remind us of the net in which Vulcan caught his adulterous wife Venus }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 in \softline
flagrante delicto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  with Mars, as Allen Tate ("The Symbolic Imagination: A Meditation on Dante's \softline
Three Mirrors," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Discussions of the "Divine Comedy,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Irma Brandeis [Boston: Heath, \softline
1961]), p. 103, has suggested.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 8.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante, facing Beatrice, the griffin, and the front of the chariot, turns to his left to pay \softline
attention to the three theological virtues, facing him as they stand at the chariot's right wheel (see \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.121).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   How can Dante love Beatrice too much?  Only if he does not love her in God.  And \softline
that, we should realize, is why he is rebuked here by the theological virtues (not the least of them \softline
being Charity), who understand that his gaze is fixed on the image of the young woman he loved \softline
and lost rather than on the saved soul who has made his journey possible.  (See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXX.58.)  The problem is as old as Plato's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phaedrus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  How do we love physical beauty in such \softline
ways as to see it as only the manifestation of a higher beauty (in Dante, of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 etterno piacer}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.32])?  See Mazzeo's "Dante and the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phaedrus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Tradition of Poetic Inspiration" (in \softline
his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Structure and Thought in the "Paradiso"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1958], pp. 1-24).  \softline
The virtues intercede because they sense that Dante is caught up in carnal appreciation of a \softline
spiritual entity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet at first may seem to be making exactly the same sort of mistake the \softline
protagonist has just made, a second idolatrous praising of his lady who, he now seems to be \softline
saying, is of even greater worth than the entirety of the Church Triumphant (or so Singleton \softline
[comm. to these verses] implies, referring to these 'strong words, calling the whole procession \softline
'poco' in comparison!').\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The passage has caused difficulty over the years.  The partial insights of several help us \softline
make sense of what Dante said.  John of Serravalle (comm. to vv. 10-18) points out that the word \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sensibile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is a technical term, reflecting such discussions as those found in Aristotle (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De anima}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II 
and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De senso et sensato}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  The sensation encountered by any particular sense organ is what is \softline
meant, and the commentator's first example fits perfectly here.  If one looks at the sun (a \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sensibile}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , an object of sense perception, in this case by the eyes), anything else will seem less \softline
bright by comparison (see the discussion of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sensibile comune}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [the objects of sensory \softline
perception] in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.47-51).  Tozer (comm. to these verses) reminds the reader \softline
of the similar passage at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.15, in which Dante's sense of sight is overwhelmed.  And \softline
Steiner (comm. to vv. 13-14) distinguishes between the light of the sun and the blinding \softline
effulgence of God.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The context here is the 'isplendor di viva luce etterna' (splendor of eternal living light), that \softline
is, the smile of Beatrice glowing with the direct light of God's rays.  Her mouth is illumined by the \softline
'sun' that is God, while all else in the garden is lit by the light of the natural sun, and thus is less \softline
available to the sense of sight than Beatrice's smile, as vv. 10-12 make all but apparent: Dante has \softline
been blinded by the Light.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The Church, in metaphor a 'glorious army,' has reversed its course, is heading back \softline
toward the east, whence it came.  In this poem, until we hear the penitents cry out in joy for the \softline
liberation of Statius's soul (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.136), the words }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gloria}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 glor{\f3 \'56}oso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  have referred to \softline
worldly fame.  But here, as there, the word has the meaning it will have in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , referring to \softline
those who live in Glory, that is, in the shining effulgence of God.  (The American nineteenth-century locution 'going to glory' meant 'headed for heaven.')  This army is not famous for its \softline
worldly accomplishments; it dwells with God and does not care for the world's rewards.  The \softline
word 'glory' has 25 of its 39 occurrences in the poem in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; thus nearly two-thirds of them \softline
are found in one-third of the available poetic space.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The elaborate military simile, in which the vanguard of the Church Triumphant had \softline
turned and was already moving eastward while the chariot was still facing west (an effect striven \softline
for and achieved by marching bands between the halves of American football games) may have an \softline
ulterior purpose.  Dante has reversed temporal order to present first the Church in triumph as it \softline
will be after time, and only then the Church in its earthly travail (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.115-120).  As preparation for that change, from Church Triumphant to Church Militant, he may have \softline
chosen this introductory military simile, one in which the forces with which we identify are under \softline
attack and in strategic retreat.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Benvenuto's gloss (comm. to vv. 25-27) suggests that, while the mortal aspect of \softline
Christ may be mutable, His divine being (represented by his wings) is not.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Matelda, Statius, and Dante are at the right wheel of the chariot, since that is the \softline
one that turns in the smaller arc, given the fact that the 'army' has turned to its right in its retreat.  \softline
Statius's presence has not been referred to since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.146 and his name has not \softline
been heard since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.47.  He is named a total of eight times between cantos XXI \softline
and XXXIII of this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , this being the seventh; nonetheless, his presence almost always \softline
catches us by surprise.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-37.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   If paradise has been regained in this Eden, it is now time to consider how it was \softline
lost in the first place; the usual suspects are Eve and Adam (in that order, since she sinned first, 
but he still more disastrously).  Eve is referred to periphrastically by the poet (verse 32), but it is \softline
Adam's name that is murmured by all the others present in the procession.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab That the procession has paused, with Beatrice descending from the chariot, indicates that \softline
we have arrived at a 'destination' of some importance.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 38-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The tree, given the context, is, literally, the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and \softline
Evil.  However, some of the first commentators (e.g., the Anonymus Lombardus [comm. to vv. \softline
38-39], Jacopo della Lana [comm. to these verses]), disregarding that context, think its withered \softline
condition indicates the Tree of Life after the original sin, when humankind lost eternal life, a \softline
perfectly sensible (if almost certainly erroneous) conclusion.  Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 37-39), \softline
paying attention to what is said of the tree in the next canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.61-63), only \softline
reasonably concludes that this tree, eaten of by Adam when he followed Eve in sin, must be the \softline
Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil.  While there have been many other interpretations \softline
(Scartazzini comm. to verse 38] claims that not a single gloss but a book would be necessary to \softline
document them all -- and indeed his gloss itself is article-length), most currently agree with \softline
Benvenuto, but also with Scartazzini's view that the allegorical sense of the tree relates it to the \softline
history of the Roman empire.\ul0 \tab  For the current debate over the meaning of the tree, see Armour \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Griffin and the History of the World: A Study of the Earthly Paradise ["Purgatorio" \softline
XXIX-XXXIII]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1989]), pp. 180-214, and Pertile (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La puttana e il gigante: \softline
Dal Cantico dei Cantici al Paradiso Terrestre di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1998]), pp. 163-96; \softline
see also Kaske ("'S{\f3 \'58} si conserva il seme d'ogne giusto' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII, 48]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  89 \softline
[1971]), p. 50.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab One literary source of Dante's tree, which, as Scartazzini and Pertile point out, has any \softline
number of biblical analogues (e.g., Judges 9:8, Ezechiel 17:24, Daniel 4:20-22; Pertile, p. 166: \softline
Song of Songs 7:7-8), was first suggested by John of Serravalle (comm. to vv. 37-42): }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgics}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
II.122-124, describing enormously tall trees in India.  We probably should assume that this tree, \softline
like those found on two of the terraces below (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.131-135; XXIV.103-105), has its \softline
boughs pointed downward so as to prevent its being climbed.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This exchange between the members of the Church Triumphant and the griffin (his \softline
only spoken words in the poem) has puzzled the commentators, like so much else in this difficult \softline
canto.  His faithful celebrate the griffin's un-Adamic restraint; not only will he not despoil the tree \softline
a second time, he will bring the dead tree back to life (vv. 58-60).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The griffin's words, as was first pointed out by Scartazzini (comm. to verse 48) and now \softline
by many another commentator, derive from Matthew 3:15.  Christ insists on being baptized by \softline
John the Baptist: 'For so it becomes us to fulfill all justice.'  That the griffin speaks a version of the \softline
very words of Christ is still further evidence that he is meant to be understood as representing \softline
Him here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The griffin now binds the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 temo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (shaft), by means of which he had been drawing the \softline
chariot, to the tree.  Most discussants currently believe that this instrument represents Christ's \softline
cross.  The first commentators argued that, since Adam's sin had been disobedience, this scene \softline
showed the obedience to which Christ enjoined his Church, a reasonable enough understanding.  \softline
While embracing it, Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 43-51) reports that some others believe that this \softline
ligature is symbolic of the Incarnation, while still others believe it is related to the cross.  This last 
interpretation eventually became dominant, and remains so today.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It was only with Scartazzini (comm. to this verse), however, that the most likely source \softline
for this tercet, the fourteenth chapter of the apocryphal Gospel of Nicodemus, which Scartazzini \softline
claims is also the source of the lengthy paraphrase found in the gloss to the passage by Francesco \softline
da Buti (comm. to vv. 43-51) came to light.  Any number of medieval legends were developed \softline
from this text (see Longfellow [comm. to verse 101]).  In it, Adam's non-canonical son Seth visits \softline
the gates of the garden of Eden, now a wasteland, in search of some oil to ease Adam's aching \softline
head (Adam has been in Limbo for nearly five thousand years).  Seth is not allowed to enter by \softline
the guardian angel, but does see a very tall tree, denuded of its leaves.  The angel gives him a \softline
branch from the tree (it is the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil) which he brings back to \softline
Adam, who has died before Seth returns to Limbo with the branch.  Planted, it soon supplied the \softline
wood that would serve for the crucifixion of Jesus.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a brief discussion of the 'Legend of the Wood of the Cross' as being applicable to \softline
Dante's phrasing here see Edward Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Third Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1903)]), pp. 219-20.  For these legends see Adolfo Mussafia ("Sulla \softline
legenda del legno della Croce," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Sitzungsberichte der philosophisch-historischen Classe der \softline
kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Vienna] 63 [1869], pp. 165-216).  It is remarkable \softline
that the Gospel of Nicodemus has not made its way into other commentaries to this tercet, since it \softline
has been a staple of commentators since Torraca (comm. to. }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.54) as a probable source for \softline
Dante's sense of the harrowing of hell, witnessed by Virgil, as it is described in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.52-63.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The rays referred to are those of the sun when it moves from Pisces into Aries, \softline
i.e., at the first buds of springtime, and before the sun moves on and into Taurus.  Our natural \softline
season of blossoming is compared, in this simile, to the miraculous and instantaneous flowering of \softline
the tree that had so long been dead, the color of its blossoms reminiscent of Christ's blood. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-62.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante leaves us with another of his little mysteries.  What was the 'hymn' that he \softline
heard sung but could not understand, except to know that it is not sung on earth?  Dante tells us \softline
as much and, as a result, the Ottimo (comm. to vv. 61-66) reasons, we cannot identify it.  \softline
However, is there a hymn, known to be sung in Heaven, that we on earth have never heard?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 inno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (hymn) occurs six times in the poem in five passages (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.125; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VIII.17; XXV.127 & 129; here; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.123).  In the occurrences previous to this one the word \softline
has been used once antiphrastically, to denigrate Plutus's unintelligible shout, and then, in its next \softline
two appearances, to refer to the hymns 'Te lucis ante' and 'Summus Deus clementiae,' respectively.  \softline
In other words, until now }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 inno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has either been used antiphrastically and thus in a general sense \softline
(i.e., 'an utterance not like a hymn') or with exactitude to indicate a particular Christian hymn.  \softline
(For the final appearance of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 inno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.118-126.)  Are we supposed to be able \softline
to identify this song?  There are, one must admit, times at which Dante leaves melody a mystery; \softline
even twice in this very canto (the 'angelica nota' [angelic song] of verse 33 and the 'pi{\f3 \'6a} dolce \softline
canzone' [song more sweet] of verse 90, his references have successfully resisted identification).  \softline
It would be unusual for Dante to have introduced a riddle without offering us the grounds for \softline
solving it.  We are looking for a song with two characteristics: it must be unknown on earth and it \softline
almost certainly must be in celebration of Jesus's victory over death.  Is there such a song?  John \softline
of Serravalle (comm. to vv. 46-48) thought so: the last book of the Bible speaks of a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canticum \softline
novum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (new song) that is sung before the throne of God (Apoc. 14.3), a citation found, 
surprisingly enough, only once again in the commentary tradition (Steiner [comm. to vv. 61-63] \softline
and then possibly again, referred to glancingly but not definitively by Trucchi [comm. to vv. 61-63]).  Robert Kaske ("Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII and XXXIII: A Survey of Christian History," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 University of Toronto Quarterly}{\plain \fs24 \f1  43 [1974]), pp. 206-7, however, while unaware that he had at \softline
least two precursors, also sees a reference here to the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canticum novum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Revelation.  Kaske cites \softline
Apocalypse 5:9, which is also apposite, if a similar passage (at Apoc. 14:3) has a certain priority, \softline
as we shall see.  In Revelation 5 Christ comes as a slain lamb (Apoc. 5:6) to judge humankind, at \softline
which the twenty-four elders and the four gospel beasts lower themselves before the king (5:8) \softline
and sing a 'new song' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canticum novum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ): 'You are worthy to take the book, and to open the seals \softline
thereof; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 for you were slain and have redeemed us to God}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ....' (5:9, italics added).  The related \softline
passage (Apoc. 14:3) deepens the resonances with }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII: 'And they sang as it were a \softline
new song [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canticum novum}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ] before the throne, and before the four beasts and the elders; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 and no \softline
man could learn that song}{\plain \fs24 \f1  but the hundred and forty and four thousand, who were redeemed \softline
from earth' (italics added).  It seems clear both what the song was and why it is not sung on earth.  \softline
For the number of those in the procession as 144, the number of the 144,000 of the Church \softline
Triumphant, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX.145-150.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's mystic sleep closes his experience of the Church Triumphant.  Once he \softline
awakens, it will have returned to Heaven (vv. 89-90).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante is willing to live dangerously.  What other medieval poet, in a serious \softline
moment of a serious poem, would turn to Ovid and to self-conscious literary humor in a moment \softline
like this?  Dante has already (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIX.94-96; and see the note to that tercet) referred to this \softline
Ovidian material (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.568-723) in these cantos dedicated to the recovery of Eden.  He \softline
compares himself to Argus of the hundred eyes (Dante of the hundred cantos?), watching over Io \softline
at Juno's behest so that Jove cannot get at his bovine girlfriend, set to drowsiness and slumber \softline
(disastrously for him) by Mercury's tale of Syrinx and Pan.  At what point does Argus fall asleep? \softline
just as Mercury's tale reports on the musical sound that issues from the reeds that were Syrinx, \softline
who had escaped Pan's lustful pursuit and vanished.  Music and a disappearance are features of \softline
Dante's scene, as well.  The parallel scene is done with witty aplomb but is dealt with by the \softline
commentators only as serious business.  It is funny, as is Dante's aside to us that, if he could \softline
portray the moment of falling asleep, he would do so.  His challenge to us was taken up by \softline
Boccaccio in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Decameron}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.viii.14); with Dante's passage apparently in his author's mind, \softline
Guglielmo Borsiere (a denizen of hell in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.70) describes a similar challenge when asked \softline
what as yet unseen thing he would advise a wealthy boor to have painted in his receiving room.  \softline
Guglielmo says that he wouldn't know how to advise him, unless he were to choose 'a sneeze or \softline
something like it.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-71.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's sleep and awakening in the garden is verbally reminiscent of Ugolino's \softline
description of his awakening from his dreadful dream (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.27), the phrase 'squarci{\f3 \'62} il \softline
velame' (the veil was rent) remembered in 'squarci{\f3 \'62} il velo' (broke my veil of sleep [these are the \softline
only two occurrences of that verb in the poem]).  It also reminds us that each of the three \softline
previous days on the mountain have ended in sleep and dream.  On this fourth day, which will \softline
conclude his experience of the earthly paradise at noon, instead he has this mystic sleep }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 after}{\plain \fs24 \f1  he \softline
has had a final visionary experience of the griffin and his Church.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Rather than a reference to the 'Surgite, et nolite timere' of Matthew 17:7, frequently \softline
cited in the commentaries (first by Jacopo della Lana [comm. to vv. 73-84]), Mario Aversano ("Il \softline
canto XXXII del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La quinta rota: Studi sulla "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: Tirrenia, \softline
1988]), p. 168, prefers to believe that Matelda refers to Paul's words (Ephesians 5:14), 'Surge qui \softline
dormis' (Rise, you who are sleeping).  And see his remarks on Paul's overall importance for \softline
Dante, pp. 185-88.  Nonetheless, the passage in Matthew seems still closer to the context here, so \softline
much so that it is all but impossible not to see it as controlling this scene: 'And Jesus came and \softline
touched them and said, "Arise [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Surgite}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ] and be not afraid."  And when they had \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 lifted up their eyes they saw no man, save Jesus only.'  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.73-84.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In the scene of the transfiguration of Jesus (Matthew 17:1-8) the three apostles \softline
Peter, James, and John ascend a mountain with Jesus, see him transformed in visage (it shines \softline
with light) and raiment (his clothes become white), then see him in the company of Moses and \softline
Elijah (who, representing the law and the prophets, respectively, both promised his advent), and \softline
then hear the voice of God from a cloud proclaim that Jesus is his Son, and finally find Moses and \softline
Elijah vanished.  Just so, this simile insists, Dante thinks he finds himself (in the role of an apostle) \softline
in the company of Matelda alone.  For a study of discussions of the Transfiguration by various \softline
fathers of the Church, see Peter Chamberas ("The Transfiguration of Christ: A Study in the \softline
Patristic Exegesis of Scripture," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 St. Vladimir's Theological Quarterly}{\plain \fs24 \f1  14 [1970], pp. 48-65).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Verse 78 also clearly refers to Christ's resurrections of Jairus's daughter and of \softline
Lazarus (Luke 8:54 and John 11:43).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's phrase, 'Where is Beatrice?' will be remembered when she leaves him for the \softline
final time at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXI.64 and he asks St. Bernard, 'Ov' {\f3 \'50} ella?' (Where is she?), as Poletto \softline
(comm. to vv. 85-87) noted.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 86-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's pose is one of humility, seated on the ground on a root of the newly \softline
reflorescent tree.  Thus she who, rather than Matelda, really corresponds to Christ in the biblical \softline
parallel is the one who is 'transfigured,' 'changed in raiment,' as we shall see in a moment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Those who remain behind in the garden with Beatrice are her 'handmaids,' the seven \softline
virtues, and Matelda.  And of course there is the chariot.  Dante and Statius are the spectators of \softline
the show that is to follow.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 89-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We learn that the Church Triumphant has now returned to the Empyrean, just as it \softline
will do after it descends for Dante's sake a second time, in the sphere of the Fixed Stars (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXIII.70-72).  (For the logistics of the arrival and departure of the participants in this pageant, \softline
see the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.16-18 and XXXI.77-78.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That Beatrice is described as seated 'on the bare ground' associates her with humility \softline
in general and, perhaps more pointedly, with St. Francis, who raised humility to an art form.  See \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.135; and see the portrait of Francis in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.  For a recent \softline
review of the relations between Dante and the Spiritual Franciscans see Nicol{\f3 \'62} Mineo ("Gli \softline
spirituali francescani e l'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Apocalisse}{\plain \fs24 \f1  di Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Pour Dante: Dante et l'Apocalypse: Lectures 
humanistes de Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Bruno Pinchard and Christian Trottmann [Paris: Champion, 2001], pp. \softline
77-98).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 95.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   No longer the triumphant figure who came into the garden by descending to her \softline
chariot, Beatrice is now here to witness its devastation and, once, to protect that chariot; she is no \softline
longer in the role of conqueror.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 98-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Since the nymphs are seven and since the 'candles' leading the procession (last \softline
referred to at verse 18) are seven, and since Benvenuto (comm. to vv.  97-99) lent the hypothesis \softline
his considerable authority, some commentators have believed that those candles are the lights held \softline
by the seven virtues.  Both because the seven candles seem a part of the procession of the Church \softline
Triumphant and because they are extremely large, this hypothesis has not convinced every reader.  \softline
On the other hand, other suggestions are all minority opinions.  Francesco da Buti (comm. to vv. \softline
94-108) believed they represent the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit, but many find his argument \softline
overly subtle and unsupported by the text.  Torraca (comm. to vv. 97-99) suggested the seven \softline
sacraments ordained by Christ.  Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 97-99), uncomfortable with all \softline
earlier identifications, thought the reference was to the lamps of the wise virgins in the parable \softline
(Matthew 25:1-13) of the ten wise and foolish virgins; but the wise ones only number five.  Pertile \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La puttana e il gigante: Dal Cantico dei Cantici al Paradiso Terrestre di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: \softline
Longo, 1998]), p. 198n., points (via Alain de Lille) to the 'seven lamps of fire burning before the \softline
throne, which are the seven spirits of God' (Apoc. 4:5), thus giving support to Francesco da Buti's \softline
view, which does seem the most palatable.  For the biblical and post-biblical understanding of the \softline
winds from north (Aquilo) and south (Auster) as being the most destructive, see Pertile, pp. 197-202.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's words are clear in their promise.  (Those who believe that she is \softline
speaking not of Dante's next stay in the garden but that left him on earth cannot rationalize the \softline
disjunction caused by the fact that when Dante returns to earth he will be without Beatrice, who \softline
speaks here only of being with him in Heaven.)  Most commentators now also agree that Beatrice \softline
is not alluding to the few minutes he will now be with her in the garden, but to the short stay he \softline
will have in his second visit to the earthly paradise, after his death and ascent.  She then looks past \softline
his first and upcoming visit to paradise in order to fasten his attention on his final destination, \softline
when he, too, will be, with her, a citizen of the City of God, the new Jerusalem in which Christ is \softline
'Roman.'  Denise Heilbronn ("Dante's Valley of the Princes," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  90 [1972], p. 57, n. \softline
15), in another context, refers to the Augustinian notion of the 'pilgrim city' that finds a place in \softline
Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.11: 'pro tota civitate peregrinante in terris' (for the entire human city in its \softline
earthly pilgrimage).  The 'city of man' that is our militancy on earth is to become the heavenly \softline
Rome presided over by Christ as emperor, at least it will be for all those who will find themselves \softline
saved.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's charge to Dante is reminiscent of God's to John, author of the \softline
Revelation: 'What you see, write in a book, and send it to the seven churches...' (Apoc. 1:11).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-160.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The second pageant in the garden of Eden is both dramatically different from \softline
the first and exactly like it.  In the first instance we were given a description of the Church 
Triumphant (which exists as an ideal out of time and can only be gathered once history is done) \softline
that comes in a temporal form, moving from Genesis to the Apocalypse before Dante's eyes.  \softline
Now he sees real history, from just after the founding of the Church until the present, unfolding as \softline
a series of events performed in a sort of 'dumbshow' in a single place.  However, both pageants \softline
are presented as allegories, reflecting history, to be sure, but experienced as though they were \softline
literally fictive (e.g., the books of the Bible, the griffin, the depredations of the Church), requiring \softline
the kind of critical procedure that we expect for what Dante himself referred to (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.i.4-5) \softline
as allegory as practiced by the poets.  For an appreciation of the various scenes in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
most of which is presented as 'historical' and best analyzed with the methods of the 'allegory of the \softline
theologians,' that are presented as fictive and thus call for the more usual allegorical procedure, \softline
see Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969]), \softline
pp. 239-54.  For a recent study of the way in which the allegorizing tendencies of the early \softline
commentators was continued in the Renaissance see Bruno Porcelli ("Beatrice nei commenti \softline
danteschi del Landino e del Vellutello" [1994], in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuovi studi su Dante e Boccaccio con \softline
analisi della "Nencia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Pisa: Istituti editoriali e poligrafici internazionali, 1997], pp. 57-78).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The rest of the canto will present the history of the Church and of the empire as these two \softline
entities make their related voyages through history.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The first tribulation of the new Church was to be persecuted by the emperors of \softline
Rome, beginning with Nero (54-68) while Peter was its first pope (and was crucified in the \softline
emperor's persecution of Christians ca. A.D. 68), and extending to the reign of Diocletian (284-305).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab While the eagle of Jove may signify variously, there is no doubt that here and through the \softline
rest of the pageant of the persecution of the Church Militant it represents the empire.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 116.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrase }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nave in fortuna}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (ship tossed in a tempest) will find its way to the final \softline
world prophecy in the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.145).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice, acting as the embodiment of the Church's spirit (the chariot \softline
representing its physical being, as it were) is able to defeat the forces of heresy, the traditional \softline
interpretation of the fox.  Portirelli (comm. to these verses) identified the fox with the 'vulpes \softline
insidiosos' (insidious foxes) of the Song of Solomon (Cant. 2:15).  His adjective, however, is not \softline
found in the biblical text, where the foxes are only described as 'little,' and the phrase in fact \softline
comes from St. Augustine, who identifies heresy and exactly such foxes in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Enarrationes in Ps. \softline
LXXX}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , as was noted by Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 118-120).  The temporal progression of these \softline
scenes would indicate that Dante is thinking of the early centuries of the Church's history, after \softline
the first persecutions and before the Donation of Constantine (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.124-129).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   All commentators agree that this invasion of the chariot by the eagle of empire \softline
represents the Donation of Constantine in the first third of the fourth century (see note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XIX.115-117).  The Church was meant to operate independently of the empire (this is the \softline
essential theme of Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Here, by being given the 'feathers' that belong to empire \softline
alone, it is adulterated from its pure form.  In this formulation Dante reverses his usual view, \softline
which involves seeing the empire's rights and privileges as being curtailed by the Church.  In a 
sense the point is even stronger expressed this way: the Church is harmed by exercising its \softline
authority in the civil realm.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Since the gloss of the Ottimo (comm. to vv. 127-129), the voice from heaven is generally \softline
taken to be that of St. Peter.  From the time of the earliest commentators, however, there was an \softline
understanding that Dante's voice from heaven was a sort of calque on the story that, on the day of \softline
the Donation, a voice from heaven was heard calling out: 'Hodie diffusum est venenum in ecclesia \softline
Dei' (Today the church of God is suffused by poison).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   While there is some debate about the nature of this particular calamity, most \softline
commentators believe it refers to the 'schism' in the Church brought about by Mohammed just \softline
after the middle years of the seventh century (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII.22-31 for Dante's \softline
understanding of the relation of Islam to Christianity).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In a sort of replay of the second calamity (the Donation of Constantine) the \softline
chariot is once again covered in imperial feathers.  The standard interpretation of these verses is \softline
that they refer to the grants of lands to the Church by two French kings, Pepin and Charlemagne, \softline
in the second half of the eighth century.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The 'plumage,' which the poet suggests was 'offered perhaps with kind and innocent \softline
intent,' represents once again that which belonged to the empire by God's intent, and legally, in \softline
Dante's view, could not be surrendered to ecclesiastical authority, even though kings had chosen \softline
to do so.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX.55-57, where a similar expression is used to indicate that Constantine \softline
had sinned grievously, if without meaning to do so.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142-147.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The language and the imagery are clearly indebted to the Apocalypse (13:1) for \softline
the beast with seven heads and ten horns.  Exactly what this symbolic transformation of the \softline
Church signifies is much discussed, with little resolution.  In general, all can agree, we here see \softline
the corruption wrought by the clergy upon their own institution.  In other words, in Dante's view, \softline
the Church had weathered all attacks upon it from within and without until the time of \softline
Charlemagne.  In the next five centuries she would do such harm to herself as to make those \softline
earlier wounds mortal.  This period is marked by corruption from the papacy down to the most \softline
modestly avaricious friar; Christianity has no enemies as implacable as its own ecclesiastical \softline
institutions or its own clergy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 148-160.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Strictly speaking, this seventh and final calamity is a vision, since the Church \softline
only moved to Avignon in 1309 after the election to the papacy of Clement V in 1305.  We have \softline
now surveyed, in 52 verses, nearly thirteen centuries of the history of the Church.  For the \softline
importance of Avignon to Dante, despite the fact that the city is never mentioned by name in the \softline
poem, see Michelangelo Picone ("Avignone come tema letterario: Dante e Petrarca," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L{\u8219\'27}Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
20 [2002], pp. 5-22), pp. 5-14.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The harlot and the giant, the whore of Babylon 'with whom the kings of the earth have \softline
committed fornication' (Rev. 17:2) and Philip IV of France, bring the terrible history to its \softline
conclusion.  The chariot no longer has to do with Beatrice, replaced by this wanton spirit that \softline
gives herself to all and any, and is now controlled by France.  Dante's reaction to the 'Avignonian \softline
captivity' is proof, if any is needed, that he is not the Protestant }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 avant la lettre}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that some have \softline
tried to find in him.  Indeed, the last and only potentially (if fleeting) hopeful sign we find in the 
gradually darkening anti-triumph of the Church Militant is that the whore gazes on Dante, thus \softline
gaining for her a beating from her gigantic paramour.  What does Dante represent now?  Is he the \softline
embodiment of the truly faithful Christians who hope that their Church will be cleansed? of the \softline
Italian faithful left back on this side of the Alps? or is he Dante himself?  This penultimate detail of \softline
a difficult and encompassing allegorical pageant has left many readers perplexed.  Its final one is \softline
clear in its pessimism.  The giant responds to his lover's wayward glance by releasing the chariot \softline
from its binding to the tree and dragging it deeper into the forest, which now looks less like Eden \softline
than it resembles France.\par
}}