{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 03}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The two 'companions' are running, but not as quickly as the souls who precede them, \softline
while Virgil considers his previous inappropriate behavior and Dante his own (as we shall learn in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.7-9 and III.12-13).  The poet, as though apologizing for what he is putting Virgil \softline
through in these scenes, reminds the reader of his enduring debt to the pagan poet, without whom \softline
this journey through the afterworld would have been impossible.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The word 'ragione' in verse 3 does not mean 'reason' but 'justice,' as is attested by Dante's \softline
earlier usage in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (where it nine times refers to law, especially Justinian's codification of \softline
Roman statutes -- see Vasoli's analytical index to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , in Dante Alighieri, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Opere \softline
minori}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. I, part ii (Milan: Ricciardi, 1988)], pp. 1011-12), and the entire commentary tradition \softline
(even if a small subset of commentators believes the word here means 'conscience').  See also \softline
Marta Cristiani, 'ragione' (ED.1973.4), pp. 831-41, esp. p. 841.  In this context it nearly certainly \softline
refers to divine justice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's remorse is self-caused.  As Venturi (comm. to verse 7) remarked, Virgil \softline
rebukes himself even though he could not have been a target of Cato's anger, since he was not a \softline
soul on the way to purgation.  And thus the little fault applies to him alone, not to Dante and the \softline
others (for all of whom it is considerably more serious).  Still, the attribution of the fault continues \softline
to cause a certain confusion.  A fairly typical understanding, with an allegorizing bent, is found in \softline
Di Benedetto ("Simboli e moralit{\f3 \'42} nel II canto del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Giornale storico della letteratura \softline
italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  162 [1985]), pp. 179-80: 'The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 picciol fallo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is that of Virgil, who stands for Reason and \softline
thus for Dante himself....  The "trivial fault" is assigned to Dante and the other souls.'  Pasquazi \softline
("Catone," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cultura e scuola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13-14 [1965]), p. 538, on the other hand, sees the phrase as referring \softline
to Virgil and not the others.  Levitan ("Dante as Listener, Cato's Rebuke, and Virgil's Self-Reproach," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  103 [1985]), pp. 50-54, also notes the differing nature of the guilt \softline
afflicting Virgil, whose drama is not one of potential salvation, from that of Dante (and the other \softline
Christian souls, one is tempted to add).  In this vein see also Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New \softline
Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990]), p. 40.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-11.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The image of Virgil looking somewhat foolish because he is running is the sort of \softline
detail one would expect to find in no other medieval poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Virgil, here momentarily lacking }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 onestade}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (dignity), is bracketed by the figures of Cato \softline
and the group containing Manfred; both of these are referred to as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 onesto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.119; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
III.87).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 12-13.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As Virgil is preoccupied with his minor failing, so Dante is troubled by his own \softline
guilty thoughts.  Daniello (comm. to verse 12) points to Cato's rebuke (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.120-121) as the \softline
cause of his shame when he considers his hesitation in moving toward the necessary mountain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 dislagarsi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (literally meaning 'to unlake itself') is a Dantean coinage, a \softline
phenomenon that will grow as the poem progresses and flower in profusion in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's presence here in the body is a double-edged proposition, as it both \softline
emphasizes his extraordinary state of grace in being here in the flesh and his debilitated status, 
resulting from his fleshly view of things.  For a study of this phenomenon and its development \softline
through the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Philip Berk ("Shadows on the Mount of Purgatory," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  97 \softline
[1979], pp. 47-63), who points out that, while we may feel that Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  all too \softline
frequently presents himself as casting a shadow, he in fact does so only six times: here; later in this \softline
canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.88-90); then in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.4-6, V.25-27, XXVI.4-8; XXVII.64-69.  Berk also \softline
makes the point that Dante's corporeal shadow finds a correspondence, later in the canto, in \softline
Manfred's wounds (vv. 108, 111), the signs of that soul's former mortality.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having noted his own shadow, the protagonist now is struck by the absence of \softline
Virgil's, and momentarily thinks he has been abandoned by his guide.  While, as soon as the \softline
travelers reached the shore of the mount of purgatory and reentered the sunlight, the protagonist \softline
might have noted that none of the immortal denizens of this new place casts a shadow -- not Cato, \softline
none of the pilgrims, not his guide -- the poet reserves that recognition for this canto, so filled \softline
with reminiscence of the death of Virgil.  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Benvenuto da Imola's paraphrase of Virgil's rebuke begins with the words \softline
'modicae fidei': ('}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 you of little faith}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , why have you so easily lost the faith and the hope that you \softline
ought and may have in me, who never left you behind in the city of the demons?').  Benvenuto is \softline
clearly thinking of the words of Christ in the Gospels (in the Latin Bible the phrase 'modicae fidei' \softline
is found four times and only in Matthew [6:30; 8:26; 14:31; 16:8]).  If Benvenuto has correctly \softline
heard that echo, its effect is noteworthy, for then the faithless Virgil is reproving his pupil, \softline
modeling his speech on the words of Christ, for }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 his}{\plain \fs24 \f1  lack of faith, evident on occasion from the \softline
first canto of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  until Virgil leaves the poem in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.  Whether Virgil is \softline
citing Scripture or having Scripture placed in his mouth by his Christian author is a problem the \softline
reader has already encountered (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.45 and the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.40-45).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-26.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Since it is shortly after dawn here in purgatory, it is shortly after sunset at the \softline
antipodes, Jerusalem.  And since Italy, in Dante's geography, lies midway between Jerusalem and \softline
Gibraltar, it is sometime after 3pm there, as evening (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vespero}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) begins with the sun's last quarter, \softline
between 3pm and 6pm.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 27.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil died on 21 September 19 B.C. at Brindisi, a city in Apulia that still serves as a \softline
port for maritime travelers to and from Greece.  Augustus was responsible for the transfer of his \softline
body from Brindisi to Naples, or actually, Pozzuoli, some ten miles distant, where it was interred \softline
in a grotto in the vast tunnel, built by the ancient Romans, connecting Pozzuoli and the road to \softline
Naples.  John of Serravalle (comm. to vv. 25-27) records his having visited the site on 30 August \softline
1413 and having held bones of Virgil in his hands.  This passage begins what has been called 'an \softline
antepurgatorial preoccupation with the body and its place of burial' (by Denise Heilbronn, \softline
"Dante's Valley of the Princes," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  90 [1972], p. 44).  Selene Sarteschi ("Riflessioni \softline
sul canto di Manfredi," in her }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Per la "Commedia" e non per essa soltanto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Rome: Bulzoni, 2002 \softline
(1999)]), p. 246n., points out that the four presences of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 corpo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in this canto represent the \softline
word's greatest frequency in any canto of the poem, thus underlining the importance of corporeal \softline
concerns with respect to Virgil, Dante, and Manfred.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to vv. 25-27) was perhaps the first to cite Virgil's \softline
versified epitaph, as found in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vitae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Virgil by Suetonius and Donatus:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab Mantua me genuit, Calabri rapuere, tenet nunc\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-1440\li1440\tx720\tx1440 
{\plain \fs24 \f1      \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab Parthenope: cecini pascua, rura, duces.\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab [Mantua gave me birth, Calabria took me off; now Naples holds me; I sang of pastures, \softline
fields, and kings.]\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Virgil 'sang' his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogues}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Georgics}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For the possible reference to the three Virgilian \softline
subjects in the final hundred verses of the canto, see Hollander ("Dante's 'Georgic' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXIV, 1-18]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  102 [1984]), p. 114:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 46-78:   the barren landscape of this scene (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rura}{\plain \fs24 \f1 )\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 79-102:  the contumacious as sheep (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 pascua}{\plain \fs24 \f1 )\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab 103-145: Manfred and empire (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 duces}{\plain \fs24 \f1 )\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 In this experimental formulation Dante would, in exactly one hundred lines, have deployed the \softline
three 'spokes' of the stylistic }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rota Vergilii}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the wheel of Virgil).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Carroll (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.19-33) cites Plumptre for the opinion that this scene reflects \softline
the (unverified) tradition that St. Paul visited Virgil's grave at Naples and wept for the great poet, \softline
whom, had he but known him, he might have led to salvation.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's heavens include the nine celestial spheres containing the Moon and, as \softline
they move higher, eventually no stellar bodies of any kind (the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Primum mobile}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  we \softline
will learn that, while they are material, they are also translucent.  Something similar is also the \softline
case with respect to the shades here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil here touches on the nature of the 'aerial bodies' of the dead in hell and \softline
purgatory.  The Roman poet Statius will elaborate on the 'physical' nature of shades in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXV.34-108.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'posthumous Christian' ruefully acknowledges, by pointing to reason as his \softline
means for attempting to know the essence of things, his failure to have had faith.  The reference to \softline
reason does not indicate, as some commentators insist, that Virgil embodies or personifies \softline
Reason, especially since, in this context, Reason would then be commenting on the shortcomings \softline
of reason.   Reason is a property (or, in Scholastic terms, an 'accident') of the Roman poet, not his \softline
essence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 quia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is a term deriving from Scholastic discourse.  Benvenuto da Imola's \softline
paraphrase (comm. to vv. 37-39) nicely conveys both that style and precisely what is meant here: \softline
'sufficiat vobis credere quia sic est, et non quaerere propter quid est' (let it suffice you to believe \softline
that something is so, without seeking to know why it is so), i.e., to accept things as they are, \softline
without attempting to understand their causes.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 38-39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Some commentators (e.g., Benvenuto) are of the opinion that these lines indicate \softline
that had humankind been able to know the final mysteries, Adam and Eve would not have fallen \softline
and Christ would not have been needed to save us.  It seems far more likely that Dante's thought 
is more logically connected than such an analysis would indicate: had we known all, there would \softline
have been no need for Christ to come to bring us the final truth of things.  The focus here is not \softline
moral so much as it is intellectual.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Perhaps there is no passage in the poem that more clearly delineates the tragedy of \softline
Virgil, now studied by its protagonist himself.  His own fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , which spoke of a virgin \softline
who would give birth to a son, but did not mean Mary and did not mean Jesus, is symptomatic of \softline
how near he came and thus how great was his failure, a result here addressed in an unspoken \softline
gesture -- his lowering his head -- that swells with unshed tears.  In the last canto, the newly \softline
arrived pilgrims looked up with hope ('la nova gente }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alz{\f3 \'62} la fronte}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' [the new people raised their \softline
faces]).  The words describing Virgil's silence echo key words from that passage in a contrastive \softline
spirit (as noted by Hollander, "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
[virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990], p. 36): 'e qui }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 chin{\f3 \'62} la fronte}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , / e pi{\f3 \'6a} non disse, e rimase turbato' [and here \softline
he lowered his brow, said nothing more, and seemed disturbed].  As Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 43-45) would have it, it is as though Virgil were saying: 'And woe is me, I was among their number.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The words in rhyme position in these two tercets underline their message:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab Maria\ul0 \tab quetato\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 \ul0 \tab quia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab Plato}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab via\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab turbato\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 One way leads up through faith to Christian truth, mediated by the mortal woman who gave birth \softline
to God in the flesh, the other down from this potential happiness, through rational attempts to \softline
know the rationally unknowable, to everlasting unhappiness.  Mary and Plato are here the very \softline
emblems of the choices that we humans face.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   There is a sharp dividing line between the elegiac passage devoted to Virgil's \softline
consideration of his failure (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.22-45) and the scene that begins here, with the description \softline
of the sheer wall of the mountain and the first attempt at an ascent.  For an appreciation of the \softline
nonetheless unitary nature of this canto as a whole, see Walther Binni ("Lettura del canto III del \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ancora con Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1983 (1955)]), p. 9.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Lerici and Turbia are settlements at either end of the Ligurian coast, to either side \softline
of Genoa, a region marked by rugged mountains sloping to the sea and, in Dante's roadless day, \softline
difficult of access.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's question and attitude reveal a guide who has not taken }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 this}{\plain \fs24 \f1  trip previously, \softline
as he had in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  Further, while he falls back on the resource of his reason, the futility of \softline
which in certain situations has just been explored by the guide himself, his pupil, like the arriving \softline
penitents in the last canto (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.40-45), does the intuitive and hopeful thing: \softline
he looks up.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Having begun their attempt to ascend, Virgil and Dante begin moving leftward out \softline
of habit, we must assume.  (They will only learn what direction they should be moving in at verse \softline
101.)  Our first glimpse of the souls of ante-purgatory marks them as unexcited and slow-moving, 
attributes that will gain in meaning when we learn more about them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For helpful references to Classical discussions of the morally charged nature of the \softline
directions of human movement (right, up, and ahead are all 'good'; left, down, and behind are all \softline
'bad') see Giorgio Stabile ("Cosmologia e teologia nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : la caduta di Lucifero e il \softline
rovesciamento del mondo," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1983]), pp. 145-49.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 \ul0 \tab Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is traditionally divided into three areas: ante-purgatorio, made up of two major \softline
zones, Excommunication and Late Repentance (the latter divided into three sub-divisions, \softline
containing those dying unabsolved, those marked by negligence, and those who loved the world \softline
too much); purgatorio itself (divided into seven terraces, each of which represents one of the \softline
Seven Capital Vices), and the earthly paradise at the summit of the mountain.  (These divisions \softline
and the first naming of 'ante-purgatory' are found in Benvenuto [introductory note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I].)  \softline
Thus, like }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno }{\plain \fs24 \f1 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is divided into ten large 'parts' (in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  Neutrality, \softline
lack of faith (Limbo), Lust, Gluttony, Avarice, Anger, Heresy, Violence, Fraud, Treachery; in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the nine heavens and the Empyrean).  However, for another view of the divisions of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see Victoria Kirkham ("I quindici gradi del regno di Catone," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana \softline
e arti figurative}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Atti del XII Convegno dell'Associazione Internazionale per gli Studi di Lingua e \softline
Letteratura Italiana [Toronto, Hamilton, Montreal, 6-10 maggio 1985], ed. Antonio Franceschetti \softline
[Florence: Olschki, 1988], vol. I, pp. 229-36).  Arguing from the Christian numerological \softline
tradition that makes fifteen the number of the spiritual ascent to God, she attempts to demonstrate \softline
that the second }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is meaningfully divided into fifteen 'steps.'  Her argument depends on an \softline
accountancy that may not seem convincing: there are four kinds of negligence, three kinds of \softline
pride, and, among the final six terraces, two that are 'double' (avarice and prodigality; \softline
heterosexual and homosexual lust), thus yielding a total of fifteen.  Further, one might object that \softline
this numbering omits both the first and last destinations of the penitent saved soul, 'pre-ante-purgatory,' where such as Casella await the journey to the antipodes (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.94-105), and the \softline
earthly paradise (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII-XXXIII), which for Kirkham obviously serves as destination \softline
rather than stage on the way to spiritual awareness, which is, however, surely to be found in the \softline
Empyrean, not in the earthly paradise itself.  One probably ends up wondering whether Dante's \softline
text itself invites his reader to enumerate the parts of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in this way.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Underlining the difference between the guide's and the protagonist's ways of \softline
proceeding, Dante's remark, urging Virgil to look up, intrinsically reveals a reversal of roles, as \softline
was noted by Margherita Frankel ("La similitudine della zara [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 . VI, 1-12] ed il rapporto fra \softline
Dante e Virgilio nell'Antepurgatorio," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Studi Americani su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 , ed. G. C. Alessio and R. \softline
Hollander [Milan: F. Angeli, 1989]), pp. 120-21.  It is not the master who is giving instructions \softline
but the pupil; throughout the little scene that follows one can sense Virgil's effort to regain his \softline
attenuated authority.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The souls are puzzled by what they see, two figures moving in the wrong direction (to \softline
the left) on this holy mountain, as Benvenuto da Imola was perhaps first to suggest.  Not only are \softline
they going in the wrong direction, they are also moving quickly, not at the reverential and \softline
thoughtful pace of penitence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 73-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 captatio benevolentiae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (the attempt to capture the goodwill of one's \softline
auditors) here, like the one he addressed to Cato in the first canto (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.70-84), reveals, as 
Margherita Frankel has been perhaps alone in arguing ("La similitudine della zara [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 . VI, 1-12] \softline
ed il rapporto fra Dante e Virgilio nell'Antepurgatorio," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Studi Americani su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 , ed. G. C. \softline
Alessio and R. Hollander [Milan: F. Angeli, 1989], pp. 122-24), another example of his not \softline
understanding his own limitations.  His epigrammatic concluding utterance, though taken }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 in bono}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
by commentator after commentator (and perhaps most pleasingly in the commentary of \softline
Benvenuto [to these verses], who goes on to claim that Dante himself was most prudent in using \softline
his time, so that he managed to get his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  finished before he died), shows him once again \softline
getting things a bit garbled.  The self-assured turn of phrase, 'The more we know, the more we \softline
hate time's waste,' indicates that he is still without understanding of the positive aspects of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
knowing, of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  hurrying -- two aspects of the saved souls whom he addresses that, as the \softline
following simile will make unmistakably clear, are praiseworthy in the Christian context of this \softline
scene.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sole extended comparison of the canto centers attention on the need for faith \softline
untroubled by reason.  These sheep, following and imitating their bellwether, are presented \softline
positively for their humility and faithfulness.  See Richard Lansing (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 From Image to Idea: A Study \softline
of the Simile in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1977]), pp. 47-53, for a discussion of this \softline
simile, contrasting the humility exemplified here in Manfred (whom we shall soon come to \softline
understand is the 'bellwether' in the simile), whose life was marked by the opposite vice, \softline
presumption, in his opposition to the Church.  In one of his typical outbursts against his \softline
intellectual enemies in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Dante calls them stupid and compares them to sheep (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
I.xi.9-10), those sheep that follow their leader in jumping into a ravine a mile deep (is that \softline
phrasing, 'mille passi,' remembered in the same phrase at verse 68, above?  Frankel ["La \softline
similitudine della zara (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 . VI, 1-12) ed il rapporto fra Dante e Virgilio nell'Antepurgatorio," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Studi Americani su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 , ed. G. C. Alessio and R. Hollander (Milan: F. Angeli, 1989)], p. 124, \softline
is of that opinion).  Citation of this passage in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was perhaps first brought into play by \softline
Daniello (comm. to vv.79-84), but it is only recently that readers have begun to understand that \softline
the ovine images in this simile work against the assertion found in the Convivial outburst.  Its \softline
prideful, even presumptuous, tone is here countermanded by the poet's better understanding of the \softline
virtues of sheep, as the arrogance of prideful philosophizing gives way to Christian piety.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab In his commentary to this passage, Singleton notes the appropriateness of the 77th Psalm \softline
(77:52 [78:52]), recapitulating the Exodus with these words: 'But [God] made his own people go \softline
forth like sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a flock.'  It seems clear that such \softline
traditional Judeo-Christian images of the flock of the just govern this simile.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   If we had not sensed the importance of humble acts committed by those 'not knowing \softline
why' in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.84, the fact that the souls, now described directly, repeat what had been \softline
done within the simile reinforces the importance of the point.  Denise Heilbronn ("Dante's Valley \softline
of the Princes," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  90 [1972]), p. 45, typifies the spirit of the portrayals of the souls in \softline
ante-purgatory as follows: 'These souls are suspended in a limbo different from Virgil's.  Not quite \softline
detached from the place they have left, they are on the right road yet cannot move; not quite sure \softline
where they are headed, they are poised between memory and anticipation.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For Dante's shadow, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.16-18.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 101-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The saved souls now express their concern: Dante and Virgil are heading in the \softline
wrong direction (see Margherita Frankel, "La similitudine della zara (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 . VI, 1-12) ed il \softline
rapporto fra Dante e Virgilio nell'Antepurgatorio," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Studi Americani su Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 , ed. G. C. Alessio \softline
and R. Hollander [Milan: F. Angeli, 1989], pp. 121-22).  They are thus aesthetically and morally \softline
disturbing as newcomers to purgatory.  They seem obviously entitled to be present but somehow \softline
not to have gotten their copy of this club's booklet describing Proper Conduct for Members.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The gesture that they make is puzzling to American readers, who give the sign for 'stop!' \softline
or 'go back!' by extending their palms outward.  As Lombardi (comm. to verse 102) calmly points \softline
out, 'The gesture referred to here by the poet is exactly the one with which we signal to others \softline
that they should turn and retrace their steps.'  Experience on Tuscan streets and paths even today \softline
will verify this.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Manfred died (February 1266) some eight or nine months after Dante was born.  \softline
His question is thus groundless, notwithstanding the exertions of commentators like Tommaseo \softline
(comm. to these verses), Andreoli (comm. to verse 105), and Poletto (to these verses) who argue \softline
that Dante, as a deeply thoughtful man, looked old for his age.  The utterly human perception that \softline
lies behind the poet's lending Manfred this question is that the great and famous are used to being \softline
recognized, and often assume that everybody has seen them, even if they themselves tend to have \softline
small recollection of the many whom they have encountered.  On the other hand, his question may \softline
also be a hopeful one, i.e., if this living soul happens to recognize him, Manfred hopes that he will \softline
cause others to pray for him -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.49-50, where other late-repentant souls make \softline
similar requests.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 107-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The 'realism' of the detail of this scarred eyebrow has drawn much admiration.  \softline
Singleton's comment (comm. to this verse) cites Augustine, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De civ. Dei}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.xix.3: 'For, in the \softline
martyrs, such wounds will not be a deformity; they will have a dignity and loveliness all their own; \softline
and, though this radiance will be spiritual and not physical, it will, in some way, beam from their \softline
bodies.'  He goes on to suggest that Manfred, though excommunicated by the Church, nonetheless \softline
is treated here as a sort of martyr, 'persecuted' by that very Church.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Having once seen John Fitzgerald Kennedy standing in a convertible moving up Fifth \softline
Avenue on a magnificent sun-filled autumn afternoon in October of 1960, shortly before he was \softline
elected president of his country, his shock of red-blond hair dazzling in the sunlight, the writer \softline
cannot read this passage without remembering that other handsome, womanizing, self-confident \softline
leader who would also die wounded in the head.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a Biblical passage that Dante possibly had in mind as he described Manfred, see \softline
Grandgent (comm. to verse 107): 'Cf. 1 Samuel 16:12: "Now he [David] was ruddy, and withal of \softline
a beautiful countenance and goodly to look at.'''  Manfred's resemblance to David has been \softline
reasserted by various later commentators.  Bosco/Reggio (comm. to vv. 106-120) add a similar \softline
description of Roland in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Chanson de Roland}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (verse 2278: 'Bels fut e forz e de grant \softline
vasselage').  John Freccero (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Rachel Jacoff [Cambridge: \softline
Harvard University Press, 1986]), pp. 206-7, sees a resemblance to the similarly handsome and ill-fated Marcellus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.860-885).  However, the literal context does not seem to support this \softline
analogy and it may be more appropriate to consider another Virgilian antecedent to Manfred, the \softline
tragic figure of Deiphobus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.495-499), who attempts to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 hide}{\plain \fs24 \f1  his wounds from Aeneas, his \softline
mangled ears and his nose ('truncas inhonesto volnere naris' [his nostrils laid bare by a shameful 
wound -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.498]).  Deiphobus, desiring }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 not}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to be recognized by his wounds, is, in this \softline
understanding, a foil to Manfred, eager to display the wound in his chest.  Perhaps the first \softline
commentator to note this correspondence was Mattalia (comm. to verse 111); and see Hollander \softline
("Dante's 'Georgic' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV, 1-18]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  102 [1984]), p. 119. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Manfred's second wound (the poet will insist on the importance of the fact that he \softline
has }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 two}{\plain \fs24 \f1  visible wounds in verse 119), perhaps reminiscent of the wound in Christ's side (John \softline
19:34; 20:25), causes the reader to consider the possible significances of these two marks on his \softline
body.  Perhaps we are to understand that the first wound, in his brow, traditionally and in Dante \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 locus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of pride (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.45 and the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.45; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.35 and the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXXIV.35), is the sign of his pride brought low, his mark of Cain, as it were, now made good in \softline
his gesture of revealing his other wound, his mark of Christ, the seal of his humility.  Torraca \softline
(comm. to vv. 109-111) is nearly alone in seeing the resemblance, antithetic though it be, between \softline
the gestures of self-revelation in displaying wounds found in Manfred here and in Mohammed \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII.29-31); and see the similar appreciation in Denise Heilbronn ("Dante's Valley of the \softline
Princes," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  90 [1972]), p. 43.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Manfred's smile is part of a 'program' of smiling found in the two final }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (see \softline
the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.83).  His way of naming himself seems to be part of a program limited to the \softline
ante-purgatory, the only part of the poem in which characters name themselves using this formula \softline
('io son' followed by their own name).  Manfred's smiling self-identification stands out from the \softline
evasive behavior in this regard exhibited by most of the sinners in hell.  For the others who \softline
employ this formula see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.88 (Buonconte da Montefeltro), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.34 \softline
(Sordello), }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.7 (Virgil).  In the less personal exchanges in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  only St. \softline
Bonaventure uses a version of it: 'Io son la vita di Bonaventura...' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.127).  There the great \softline
Franciscan identifies himself as a living heavenly soul.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Born ca. 1231, Manfred was the illegitimate son of the emperor Frederick II and Bianca \softline
Lancia, and thus the natural grandson of Emperor Henry VI and Constance of Sicily.  He was also \softline
the father, by his wife Beatrice of Savoy, of Constance, who married King Peter III of Aragon \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.115-116).  When Frederick died in 1250, Manfred was appointed regent of Sicily in \softline
the absence of his brother, Conrad IV, involved elsewhere.  When Conrad died, in 1254, leaving \softline
the realm to his three-year-old son, Conradin, Manfred again became regent.  At the rumors of the \softline
child's death, in 1258 (he would in fact survive another ten years), Manfred was crowned king in \softline
Palermo.  This did not sit well with the pope, and Alexander IV excommunicated him in 1258, as \softline
did Urban IV in 1261.  Urban offered the vacated forfeited crown to Louis IX of France who, \softline
refusing it, opened the path to an invitation of Charles of Anjou, who accepted.  Once Charles \softline
was crowned in Rome in January 1266, he set out to destroy Manfred, an aim that he \softline
accomplished the next month at the battle of Benevento.  A lover of the 'good life' at court, a \softline
fervent Ghibelline, a man charged (whether correctly or not) with a number of murders of his \softline
cofamiliars, supposedly undertaken to advance his political hopes, Manfred was not, at least not in \softline
Guelph eyes, a selection for salvation that could have been calculated to win sympathy to the \softline
work that contained such news.  It is at least reasonable to believe that the first damned soul we \softline
see in hell is Celestine V (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.58-60), a pope of saintly habits; here the first soul \softline
we find saved on the mountain is the excommunicated Manfred.  Whatever else Dante enjoyed \softline
doing as he wrote this poem, he clearly delighted in shocking his readers -- as though the salvation 
of Cato, with which the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  begins, were not incredible enough for us.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab On the problems raised for commentators by the salvation of the excommunicated \softline
Manfred see Louis La Favia ("Per una reinterpretazione dell'episodio di Manfredi," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
91 [1973]), who points out that a letter of Pope Innocent III dating from 1199 fully supports the \softline
notion that an excommunicate can eventually be saved, a position, as he demonstrates, that was \softline
not nearly as shocking to Dante's earliest readers as it would later become.  La Favia produces the \softline
key portion of that Latin text (pp. 87-88).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 113.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Manfred does not identify himself as his father's son (Frederick II is, after all, \softline
condemned to hell for heresy: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.119) but by reference to his paternal grandmother, \softline
Constance  (1154-98), daughter of Roger II, king of Sicily, and wife of Emperor Henry VI, by \softline
whom she became the mother of Frederick.  As Benvenuto uniquely (among the early \softline
commentators) points out, Dante has borrowed this tactic from Polynices who, questioned about \softline
his lineage by the king of Argos, Adrastus, in Statius's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , prefers to omit the name of \softline
Oedipus in favor of that of his mother, Jocasta (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Theb}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.676-681).  Porena (comm. to vv. 112-113) notes that Dante himself had remembered this scene in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Conv}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.xxx.10), laying \softline
the avoidance on Polynices' part both to his desire to omit reference to his own harsh actions \softline
against his father as well as to keep concealed Oedipus's evil deeds.  Hermann Gmelin \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Kommentar: der L{\f2\u228\'e4}uterungsberg}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Stuttgart: Klett, 1955]), p. 79, offers further discussion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The poet's self-awareness is unmistakable here.  Hardly anyone in his time would \softline
have consented to the notion that Manfred had been saved.  He places this reference to the \softline
imagined dubiety of those who might hear such news (i.e., by reading Dante's poem) in the mouth \softline
of his character and it is our turn to smile.  Yet we can imagine how many Guelphs and \softline
churchmen would have fumed at this passage, adamant in their vehement and unflagging belief \softline
that Manfred had been damned.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sinners in hell, we must assume, failed exactly to do, even at the last \softline
moment of their lives, what Manfred did.  While he is held back from purgation for the \softline
insubordination that resulted in his excommunication, he, too, is a late-repentant saved soul.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The archbishop of Cosenza, in Calabria, enlisted by Pope Clement IV in his \softline
battles against Manfred's Ghibellines, was responsible, at the end, for disinterring his corpse, \softline
buried under the cairn of stones piled upon his body by Guelph troops after the battle of \softline
Benevento.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab There is some dispute as to the precise meaning of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 faccia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here.  Does it mean \softline
'face' or 'page'?  For the former, see Freccero (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Rachel \softline
Jacoff [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986]), p. 206.  For 'faccia' as page, see Frankel \softline
("Dante's Anti-Virgilian }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 villanello}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  102 [1984]), p. 107.  The page in God's \softline
writing indicated here is perhaps found at Revelation 20:12, the reference to the Book of Life, in \softline
which are recorded the names of the saved, including, we must reflect, that of Manfred.  Further, \softline
three particulars lend support to those who argue for 'page,' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 faccia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as an apocopation of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 facciata}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : \softline
(1) While most of the early commentators are vague in their readings of this verse, those who \softline
wrote in the Renaissance and after tend to find this interpretation more natural; (2) modern \softline
commentators mainly prefer 'face,' if without the sort of convincing argument that might conclude 
the debate; (3) the archbishop of Cosenza, we might reflect, obviously had no direct experience of \softline
God's presence (at least not in Dante's mind), but he surely did have some kind of access to the \softline
Scripture, although he evidently -- at least in Dante's eyes -- understood it poorly.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In the wake Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 130-132) many modern commentators \softline
suggest that there is a reference here to Virgil's Palinurus (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.362): 'Nunc me fluctus habet \softline
versantque in litore venti' (Now the waves have me and the winds hurl me onto the beach).  See \softline
the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.91-93 and VI.28-33.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 131-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Adding insult to the injury of disinterment, the archbishop ordered Manfred's \softline
remains to be cast back into the world.  They had first at least been allowed burial in \softline
unconsecrated ground with the ceremony prescribed for the excommunicate ('with torches \softline
quenched').  And so the corpse is put out of the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily onto a bank of the \softline
river Verde, today the Liri.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The name of the river,}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Verde}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (green), however, stands intrinsically opposed to such \softline
purpose, since it both traditionally represents the virtue of hope and happens to have been the \softline
color that Manfred himself favored.  And thus the identical rhyme 'Verde/verde' underlines the \softline
hopeful sign that Manfred's faith believed would come and his love longed for.  The Church's \softline
human agents may not understand God's hidden disposition.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The final phrase here, 'ha fior del verde,' has caused much difficulty.  Lombardi (comm. to \softline
verse 135) paraphrases the passage as follows: 'so long as death does not entirely dry up hope, but \softline
leaves a single thread of it green.'  The spirit of comedy in this canto overcomes the atmosphere of \softline
tragedy.  We might reflect that this is the first true narrative of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (neither Cato nor \softline
Casella gives the sort of perfectly formed autobiographical performance to which we have become \softline
accustomed in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  The first }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  has trained us to expect "tragedy," the tale told, from \softline
the sinner's point of view, of death and damnation.  Unconsciously, we may expect exactly that \softline
sort of narrative here.  And it surely seems to be similar, with its story of horrific death and \softline
undignified burial; yet here we find the tragic surmounted by the comic resolution offered by \softline
redemption.  Thus Manfred's narrative is set as a pattern for all those we shall hear in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  \softline
For a discussion of Manfred's narrative as tragic in tone and comic in result, see Selene Sarteschi \softline
("Riflessioni sul canto di Manfredi," in her }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Per la "Commedia" e non per essa soltanto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Rome: \softline
Bulzoni, 2002 (1999)]), p. 237.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a possible precursor for this period of delay, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.325-30, the one \softline
hundred years of wandering exacted of the souls of the unburied dead before they are permitted to \softline
cross Acheron, a connection perhaps first suggested by Daniello (comm. to vv. 136-141).  But \softline
this does not explain Dante's choice of the number thirty.  It is not until the twentieth century that \softline
one finds a commentator wondering about the possible reasons for this choice: Grandgent (comm. \softline
to this verse): {\u8219\'27}Why thirty?  See E. G. Gardner in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , IX, 63.  In \softline
Deuteronomy 34:8, we read: "the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty \softline
days.  Hence the early Christian practice of saying prayers for the dead for thirty days after \softline
decease.  Out of this grew the 'Trental of St. Gregory,' or thirty masses on thirty feast days \softline
through the year.{\u8219\'27}  Trucchi (comm. to vv. 136-141) resuscitates a previously unnoted observation \softline
of Francesco da Buti, recalling the tale told by Gregory the Great in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dialogues}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : the ghost of a \softline
monk named Justus who, buried excommunicate for having fathered children, was redeemed 
when thirty masses said by Gregory set things right.  Another analogue, offered by a Princeton \softline
student, Gerald Dal Pan '82, in an examination paper in 1980, is worthy of discussion: the thirty \softline
years of Jesus's life before he was baptized and entered by the Holy Spirit, when He took on his \softline
mission in the world (Luke 3:25).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Torraca (comm. to vv. 136-139) suggests that Manfred lived nine years under the ban of \softline
excommunication and thus had a sentence of 270 years in ante-purgatory when he died in 1266, \softline
thus leaving him 236 years to wait before commencing his purgation.  However, since Dante's \softline
poem surely brought a storm of prayers to Heaven, he may have finished his penitential waiting \softline
much earlier than that.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 143.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The third cantos of both }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  are centrally involved with two \softline
women known as 'Constance,' here the grandmother and daughter of Manfred, there Piccarda \softline
Donati, whose name as a nun was Constance, and the other Constance, also a nun, who \softline
accompanies her when the two of them appear to Dante in the sphere of the Moon.  It is perhaps \softline
worth considering that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III, in which the wavering neutrals are depicted, involves those \softline
who were, most decidedly, inconstant.  See Isidore of Seville, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Etymologies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.40: 'Constans dictus \softline
quod undique stat, nec in aliquam partem declinari potest' (One is said to be constant because, \softline
wherever he takes his stand, he cannot be diverted in another direction).  In this tentative \softline
hypothesis all three third cantos would thus be linked by their thematic concern with constancy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For bibliography of discussions of this canto see Luigi Scorrano ("Dall'abbandono alla \softline
bont{\f3 \'42} riconquistata [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  16 [2000]), pp. 69-71.\par
}}