{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 33}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The last canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio }{\plain \fs24 \f1 begins, like those of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , with poetry \softline
(see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.1 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.1-39).  In all three cases, the poem cited is in another voice \softline
than Dante's.  In the first two cases this voice is Latin, first that of Venantius Fortunatus (his \softline
hymn of the cross), now that of David (his hymn for the desolation of Jerusalem, Psalm 78 [79], \softline
which begins, 'O God, the heathen have come into your inheritance').  Thus do the seven virtues \softline
respond to the present culminating moment in the history of the Church Militant.  As Benvenuto \softline
explains (comm. to these verses), just as the various gentile nations had invaded and oppressed \softline
the Holy Land because of the sins of the Jews, so now has God again allowed foreigners, in this \softline
case the French, to take possession of holy Church because of the sins of the latter-day 'Romans.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab How much of the Psalm is sung is not discernible, but probably more than the first few \softline
words, since we are told that the weeping ladies sing alternating verses.  Singleton (comm. to \softline
verse 1) suggests that the first eight verses would have been appropriate.  Bosco/Reggio (comm. \softline
to verse 1) point out that, beginning with its ninth verse, the Psalm is more optimistic, asking for \softline
God's help and hoping for His intervention.  For a similar question regarding the singing of a \softline
Psalm, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXX.82-84.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's first response to the singing of the Psalm is to join in its sense of \softline
desolation.  Her sadness is such that even Mary's grief at the foot of the cross for her dead son \softline
was only slightly more profound.  Mary grieves for the death of Jesus, Beatrice for the desolation \softline
of his mystical body, the Church.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The words that Beatrice sings reflect closely Jesus's words to his disciples (John \softline
16:16), '}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 A little while and you shall not see me; and again a little while and you shall see me,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
because I go to the Father.'  Since the disciples are puzzled by these words, Jesus explains them: \softline
Now they may weep, but their sorrow will be turned to joy (John 16:20).  The disciples are finally \softline
won over, finally believe that Jesus comes from God (John 16:30).  Jesus ends his remarks by \softline
promising them peace after their tribulation and concludes, 'I have overcome the world' (John \softline
16:33).  Thus do these twelve opening verses of the last canto of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  move from a tragic \softline
sense of loss to a celebratory and comic vision of the eventual triumph of Christ and his Church.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Beatrice's words also have a particular and local meaning for Dante, who wept at her \softline
death and thought he had lost her forever; she has come back into his life.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This tercet reminds the reader exactly who is present in this scene (see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.88), Beatrice, her handmaids (the seven virtues), Dante, Matelda, and Statius.  Not \softline
only is the Church Triumphant no longer in sight, the Church Militant has been dragged off to \softline
France.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The way in which Statius is referred to ('the sage who had remained') reminds the reader, \softline
yet again, of the absence of Virgil, denied this moment.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Those that allegorize the nine steps taken by Beatrice argue that they represent the \softline
years between the accession of Pope Clement V in 1305, who agreed to King Philip's desire to \softline
move the papacy to France (which he did in 1309), and the deaths of Clement and Philip in 1314, \softline
thus possibly allowing the tenth step to point to the advent of the new leader in 1315.  About such 
things there can be little or no certainty, but the hypothesis is attractive.  Nonetheless, one should \softline
probably be aware that, except for a rather contorted effort by Francesco da Buti (comm. to vv. \softline
16-30), none of the early commentators, generally so fond of allegorizing, offers anything more \softline
than a literal reading of the detail.  The allegorical reading of the ten steps as ten years is a \softline
nineteenth- and twentieth-century discovery, e.g., as it is found in Carroll (comm. to vv. 16-45).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 23.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the first time Beatrice addresses Dante as 'brother.'  (She will do so on only \softline
three later occasions: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.100; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.58; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.130).  For the importance and \softline
distribution of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 frate}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the three }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.127.  One \softline
senses, again, that her desire to rebuke Dante is (temporarily) suspended.  But see vv. 85-90.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Beatrice for the first time, and in keeping with the spirit of her citation of John 16:16 in \softline
vv. 10-12, turns her attention to the future, and to Dante's future, now that the world's and his \softline
own sinful past have been dealt with.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-28.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 25-30) compares Dante to a student in the presence of \softline
his teacher, and indeed this is the opening moment in what might be called Dante's education in \softline
theology, which will last for another thirty cantos.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-33.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Before she presents her prophecy, Beatrice charges Dante with the responsibility \softline
for reporting it precisely, not in the mode of a man who is talking in his sleep.  Almost all the \softline
commentators take the passage literally and as applying in some general way.  But Beatrice's \softline
words are very hard on poor Dante, since she makes it clear that, at least in her (infallible) \softline
opinion, his actual words, uttered at some previous time, have indeed been correctly characterized \softline
in this way.  But when?  Perhaps the later passage in this canto (vv. 85-90) that is devoted to his \softline
previous intellectual meanderings may shed some light on exactly what she means.  For now the \softline
subject is left unexplored.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The importance of the rebuke, which passes mainly unobserved in the commentaries, is \softline
underlined by its difference from a similar rebuke.  Mattalia (comm. to verse 33) is alone in \softline
thinking of that one (if he draws no conclusion from his notice of it): }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.120-123, \softline
when Virgil believes that Dante, beholding an ecstatic vision, is merely drunk or asleep.  Now \softline
Beatrice reverses the situation: when Dante has considered himself 'awake' and eloquent, he has \softline
been, in fact, 'talking in his sleep.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 34-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The language, referring to the destruction of the Church as detailed in the \softline
preceding canto, is distinctly reflective of the Apocalypse (Apoc. 17:8, 'The beast that you saw \softline
was, and is not').  For clear discussions of the terms 'apocalypticism' and 'millenarianism' and the \softline
differences between them, see Richard Emmerson ("The Secret," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 American Historical Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
104 [1999]), pp. 1610-13.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 suppe}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (here translated 'hindrance' only to make sense in its context) has been \softline
variously understood.  Many of the early commentators believed it referred to the cakes left on \softline
the tomb of a murderer's victim in a Greek custom reborn in Florence; if the murderer came to the \softline
tomb and ate of these cakes for nine consecutive days, he would then be safe from the offended \softline
family's vengeance (and for that reason the families of the slain person would keep watch over the \softline
tomb).  See Portirelli (comm. to these verses) for a restatement of this interpretation, which is at \softline
least as old as the commentary of Jacopo della Lana.  Others think the reference is to the bread 
soaked in wine on which an oath is sworn between vassal and lord; still others of the offal which \softline
the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 veltro}{\plain \fs24 \f1  will despise (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.103), and which is related to the 'sop' to Cerberus of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
VI.420.  None of these 'sops', however, would seem to offer a cause for fear, and are thus difficult \softline
to rationalize in this context.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The opening verses of Beatrice's extended prophecy seem clearly to indicate that \softline
the one who will come is related to the eagle of empire, i.e., that beneficent Roman empire that \softline
had begun so well under Augustus and then had become corrupt.  It seems difficult to believe that \softline
this, as some maintain, is not an imperial prophecy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This enigmatic passage has drawn an extraordinary amount of contradictory \softline
opinion.  For a review of the entire question, see Pietro Mazzamuto, "Cinquecento diece e \softline
cinque" (ED.1970.2), pp. 10b-14b.  It is also helpful to consult Charles Davis's similar review of \softline
the first and similar prophecy in the poem, the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 veltro}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (hound) of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.101 ("veltro" \softline
[ED.1976.5], pp. 908a-912b). Most now argue, whether or not they believe that the number, if \softline
expressed by the Roman numerals DXV, is an anagram of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 DUX}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (or 'leader' [the Roman 'V' and 'U' \softline
being equivalent letters]), that the context of the passage makes it apparent that Beatrice is here \softline
indicating the advent of a temporal leader, one who will deal with the excesses of the King of \softline
France and the delinquent Church.  Further, if the canto is taken as having been written before his \softline
death in August of 1313, many believe that the prophecy points to Henry VII.  Some also believe \softline
that if the first reference is to a political leader, it also points beyond him to the second coming of \softline
Christ, the final emperor.  See Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Allegory in Dante's "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton \softline
University Press, 1969]), pp. 184-90, and the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.100-105.  A standard and useful \softline
treatment of the problem remains that of Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , Third Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellaneous \softline
Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1968 (1903)]), pp. 253-83.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For a brief history of the ancient Hebrew 'science' of gematria, the fitting of numbers to \softline
letters in a schematic way, as it comes into such writers as Dante, see Cherchi ("Isopsefi e \softline
profezia," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'alambicco in biblioteca: distillati rari}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. F. Guardiani & E. Speciale \softline
[Ravenna: Longo, 2000], pp. 329-42).  He offers an example from a sixteenth-century Italian \softline
dialogue (pp. 337-38) that is usefully indicative of the sort of procedure at work in such \softline
calculations:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 A = 1\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 B = 2\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 C = 3\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 D = 4\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 E = 5\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 F = 6\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 G = 7\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 H = 8\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 I = 9\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 K = 10\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 L = 20\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 M = 30\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 N = 40\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 O = 50\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 P = 60\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Q = 70\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 R = 80\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 S = 90\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 T = 100\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 V = 200\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 X = 300\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Y = 400\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Z = 500\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 If one sets the equivalence of the Latin alphabet to numbers in this way, and if one is willing to \softline
play a bit fast and loose with the actual spellings of the names of important personages, one can \softline
contrive (find?) the following sort of result:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}\pard \fs24\fi-7920\li7920\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 M\ul0 \tab A   \ul0 \tab R   \ul0 \tab T     \ul0 \tab I   \ul0 \tab N     \ul0 \tab L   \ul0 \tab U      \ul0 \tab T     \ul0 \tab E   \ul0 \tab R   \ul0 \tab A\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-7920\li7920\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920 
{\plain \fs24 \f1 30  \ul0 \tab 1   \ul0 \tab 80  \ul0 \tab 100  \ul0 \tab 9   \ul0 \tab 40    \ul0 \tab 20  \ul0 \tab 200  \ul0 \tab 100  \ul0 \tab 5   \ul0 \tab 80  \ul0 \tab 1  =  666\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Distinct from numerological studies of Dante's work are those that study his numerical \softline
composition.  Thomas Hart's mathematical and geometrical studies of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  are of this \softline
second kind, and are rich and challenging.  See a later one ("'Per misurar lo cerchio' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII \softline
134] and Archimedes' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De mensura circuli}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Some Thoughts on Approximations to the Value of \softline
Pi," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la scienza}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Boyde and V. Russo [Ravenna: Longo, 1995], pp. 265-335), \softline
which picks up strands from his several earlier pieces and serves to summarize his long campaign \softline
to bring this sort of analysis to bear on Dante.  See also, for a much different kind of \softline
numerological study of Dante's texts, Manfred Hardt (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Die Zahl in der "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Frankfurt: Athen{\f2\u228\'e4}um, 1973)] and "I numeri nella poetria di Dante," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  61 [1989], \softline
pp. 1-27).  And see G. R. Sarolli, "numero" (ED.1973.4), pp. 87-96, and his monograph on the \softline
subject (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Analitica della "Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Bari: Adriatica, 1974]).  For bibliography see \softline
Corrado Bologna (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il ritorno di Beatrice: Simmetrie dantesche fra "Vita nova," "petrose" e \softline
"Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Rome: Salerno, 1998)]), pp. 120-22.  A recent attempt to reformulate Dante's \softline
numerology is found in Wilhelm P{\f2\u246\'f6}tters ('Ella era uno nove': Rapporti geometrici fra la }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita Nova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
e la }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [2001], pp. 27-60 and "'La spera che pi{\f3 \'6a} larga \softline
gira': Spazio della poesia e disegno del cosmo," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 [2002], pp. 461-505), reopening the question of Beatrice's 'nineness' in the first study and attempting to measure \softline
Dante's cosmos in the second.  Insofar as his thesis depends on Beatrice being the sixty-first \softline
beautiful woman of Florence recorded in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sirventese}{\plain \fs24 \f1  described in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 VN}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI ("Ella era uno nove," \softline
p. 36) and on the letters DIL in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.78 being read as 549 (and not 551 -- p. 41]), it is in \softline
some difficulty.  In the first case Beatrice already seems to be indicated as one }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 among}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the sixty \softline
'belle donne,' the ninth (and not the sixty-first; there is no sixty-first); in the second, there is at \softline
least as much reason to believe, if there is any compelling reason to count these letters as numbers \softline
in the first place, that DIL = DLI as to believe that it resolves, as P{\f2\u246\'f6}tters is forced to insist, to \softline
DXLIX (DIL as an 'unorthodox' version of DXLIX).  Numerological arguments that ask one to \softline
surrender that much normal obstinacy (common sense?) possess a limited capacity to sway their \softline
judges.  For an interesting attempt to approach the problem of overarching structural concerns 
from the other side, as it were, the possibility of casual explanations for poetic phenomena in the \softline
poem, in this instance involving a study of repeating rhyme words in a canto, see Federico Turelli \softline
("Il ruolo della casualit{\f3 \'42} nelle ripetizioni di rima della }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura italiana antica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 \softline
[2002], pp. 507-23).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Two studies, completed independently of one another, by Robert Kaske ("Dante's 'DXV' \softline
and 'Veltro,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Traditio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  17 [1961], pp. 185-254) and Gian Roberto Sarolli (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Prolegomena alla \softline
"Divina Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Olschki, 1971]), pp. 259-88, link the DXV to the ligated initials \softline
of the liturgical formula 'Vere dignum est,' involving the capital letters 'V' and 'D,' joined around \softline
and capital 'X' (the sign of the cross).  Because both of these densely supported presentations tend \softline
to overlook the obvious political dimensions of the prophecy in favor of its Christological \softline
significance, they have failed to generate a groundswell of support, while they both remain a part \softline
of the continuing discussion.  For an attempt to show that Dante was referring to a division \softline
number in Gratian's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Decretals}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (precisely to Distinction XV (i.e., D[istinction).XV] in Part I), see \softline
Richard Kay ("Dante's Razor and Gratian's D.XV," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  97 [1979], pp. 65-95).  John \softline
Stark ("Once Again, Dante's Five Hundred, Ten and Five," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Romance Quarterly}{\plain \fs24 \f1  44 [1997], pp. \softline
99-106) has argued, in a way that is similar to Kay's, for a reference to line numbers within \softline
another work, in this case }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.500, I.10, and I.5.  Neither of these two highly ingenious \softline
solutions of the enigma has received significant support from other students of the problem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab If it is true, as some argue, that Dante's number represents the number of years between \softline
great imperial events, e.g., the years between Charlemagne's coronation on Christmas Day, 800, \softline
and the hoped-for victory of Henry VII in 1315, then it seems at least possible that he had in mind \softline
as its model one of the most important prophetic passages in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.260-277), in which the \softline
time between Aeneas's war to win new Troy and the establishment of Rome under Romulus is \softline
carefully measured out as 333 years.  For development of this thesis, see Robert Hollander and \softline
Heather Russo ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  33.43: Dante's 515 and Virgil's 333," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Electronic Bulletin of the \softline
Dante Society of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [March 2003]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The general sense of this passage is clear: future events will make plain the terms \softline
of the cloudy prophecy, which is compared to those made by Themis (Ovid, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.375-394) \softline
and by the Sphinx.  Both of these monstrous females later appear in the same passage in Ovid \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.759-765), where their hatred of humans is, as here, described in terms of the loss of \softline
human and animal life in the countryside.  The key lines in the modern text of Ovid run as follows: \softline
'Carmina La{\f3 \'56}ades non intellecta priorum / solverat ingeniis...' (The son of Laius [Oedipus] solved \softline
the riddles which had baffled the intellects of all before him).  We are close to being absolutely \softline
sure, however, that the text as Dante knew it substituted 'Na{\f3 \'56}ades' for 'La{\f3 \'56}ades' and showed a \softline
plural form of the verb (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 solverant}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  And so Dante believed that it was the Naiads, water nymphs, \softline
who had solved the riddle of the Sphinx.  This was the cruel monster who cast herself down from \softline
her rock, whence she had been killing clueless Thebans, once Oedipus realized that the variously \softline
footed creature in her riddle was man (the story that we know from Sophocles' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Oedipus}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
unknown, like nearly all of Greek letters, to Dante).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Dante does not 'nod' often, but this is one of the most egregious errors in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
even if it has some reasonable excuse behind it.  In fact, all of the early commentators accept \softline
Dante's reading, thus indicating that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 their}{\plain \fs24 \f1  texts also had 'Naiads' where they should have had \softline
Laius's son.  The better reading had to wait for Nikolaes Heinsius (1620-81), the Dutch Latin poet \softline
and scholar, one of the great Renaissance textual editors of the Latin classics.  His edition 
(Florence, 1646) of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metamorphoses}{\plain \fs24 \f1  restored the reading }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La{\f3 \'56}ades}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  It is thus only with the \softline
commentary of Venturi (comm. to vv. 49-50) that the better reading is made known to the world \softline
of Dante's commentators, and even then some of them try to object to it, seeking a way to \softline
understand the Naiads as interpreters of prophetic utterance.  Fausto Ghisalberti ("L'enigma delle \softline
Naiadi," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  16 [1932], pp. 105-25) offers a comprehensive discussion of the \softline
problem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's use of the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 notare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here may remind us of its last use with this sense \softline
(setting something down as a text) in Dante's self-description as inspired poet, one who only \softline
records what he hears from the 'dictator' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.53).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's often admired phrase, describing life as a '}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 correre alla morte}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' (race to death) \softline
reflects St. Augustine (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 DcD}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIII.10): 'Our time for this life is nothing other than a race to death \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cursus ad mortem}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ),' as was perhaps first suggested by Mattalia in 1960 (comm. to this verse) and \softline
has become a familiar observation in contemporary commentaries.  See also Selene Sarteschi \softline
("Sant'Agostino in Dante e nell'et{\f3 \'42} di Dante," in her }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Per la "Commedia" e non per essa soltanto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Rome: Bulzoni, 2002 (1999)]), p. 176.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As her scribe, Dante is instructed by Beatrice not to conceal from his eventual \softline
readers the condition of the tree, now robbed of its possessions twice.  Bosco/Reggio (comm. to \softline
verse 57) review the divided opinions of the early commentators, who variously believe that the \softline
reference is to Adam and the giant, to Adam and the eagle, or to the eagle and the giant.  In their \softline
view, all three seem plausible glosses.  However, it has seemed to others that, since, from \softline
Beatrice's words we gather that Dante has witnessed these two devastations (and not that of \softline
Adam, which is referred to in a following tercet [vv. 61-63]), it is the first and last attacks upon \softline
the tree that are referred to here: its defoliation by the eagle (the imperial persecutions of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXXII.112-114) and its having the chariot disattached from it by the giant (the removal to \softline
Avignon, referred to in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.158).  Such an understanding accords with Michele Barbi \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Con Dante e coi suoi interpreti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Monnier, 1941]), pp. 62-63, and opposes Bruno \softline
Nardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nel mondo di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Rome: Edizioni di "Storia e Letteratura"], 1944), pp. 153-57, who \softline
proposed Adam's theft of the fruit in the garden of Eden and the Donation of Constantine as the \softline
two thefts.  The comment found in Bosco/Reggio offers good reasons for not accepting Nardi's \softline
view.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's accusation now widens, blaming Adam as the first despoiler of the tree \softline
and praising Christ for redeeming him.  For the calculation of the length of Adam's life (930 years) \softline
and of his punishment in Limbo (4302 years) see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.118-120 and the note to that \softline
passage.  After 25 March the year 1300 is the 6499th year since the creation of Adam.  See the \softline
note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.1.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the downward-pointing branches of the tree, set at an angle that makes climbing it \softline
difficult or impossible, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.40-42.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For a paraphrase of this somewhat contorted utterance see the Outline of this \softline
canto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 67.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The river Elsa in Tuscany, because of its high concentration of minerals, was known \softline
for the crusting overlay it would leave on objects immersed in it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For Pyramus, Thisbe, and the mulberry tree, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.37-42.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word 'moralmente' was understood, even in some of the earliest commentators \softline
(e.g., Jacopo della Lana [comm. to vv. 67-72]), as having a technical meaning here, i.e., 'con lo \softline
senso tropologico' (with the tropological [i.e, third] sense [of fourfold exegesis of the Bible]).  \softline
Various later commentators are of the same opinion, e.g., Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 70-72), \softline
Scartazzini (comm. to this verse), Poletto (comm. to vv. 67-72).  (See also Tozer, Torraca, \softline
Fallani, Mattalia, Bosco/Reggio.)  What this signifies is that the meaning applies now to current \softline
history.  God's original 'interdiction,' broken by Adam, whose sin was redeemed by the cross on \softline
which Christ sacrificed Himself, is now binding on us, as well, even though we are at least \softline
potentially saved.  Even now we, new Adams, are not meant to eat of the Tree of the Knowledge \softline
of Good and Evil.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 77-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   That is, Dante, bringing back this message, will seem like a pilgrim returned from \softline
the Holy Land, his 'staff' decorated with the sign of the distant and holy place to which he has \softline
been.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These lines offer a fairly rare instance of a speaker in the poem expressing himself \softline
by use of a simile.  Dante is saying that what Beatrice tells him seems to be completely clear, but \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 that he really cannot understand what she means.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice is charging Dante with having attempted to eat of the Tree of the \softline
Knowledge of Good and Evil.  As some commentators (e.g., the Ottimo [comm. to vv. 79-90], \softline
Scartazzini [comm. to vv. 79-102]) have understood, the point here seems to be that Dante turned \softline
from theology to philosophy in his effort to do that.  The current majority view of the nature of \softline
Dante's aberration is well represented by Bosco/Reggio (comm. to verse 85): Dante had, in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , set theology to one side in order to study philosophy, a decision he now deplores.  For \softline
the notion that this fairly common view is incorrect, see John Scott ("Beatrice's Reproaches in \softline
Eden: Which 'School' Had Dante Followed?" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  109 [1991], pp. 1-23).  He argues \softline
that Dante's high regard for philosophy does not allow such an interpretation and that the 'school' \softline
in question is thus the Guelph and anti-imperial one that Dante had embraced in his polital \softline
activities as a White Guelph in Florence before the exile.  Scott shares with Dronke (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's \softline
Second Love: The Originality and the Contexts of the "Convivio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Exeter: Society for Italian \softline
Studies, 1997]) an unwillingness to believe that Dante's special relationship with the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 donna gentile}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and, more to the point, the Lady Philosophy of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , somehow must be \softline
considered as anti-Beatricean.  On the testimony of passages such as this, it seems likely that the \softline
poet expected us to accept exactly such a view.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Beatrice's response to Dante is worthy of the Inquisition.  That he can no longer \softline
remember his sins (because he has drunk from Lethe, the river of oblivion) is proof that he had \softline
committed them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's phrasing, 'if from seeing smoke we argue there is fire,' might remind a reader \softline
of St. Augustine's discussion of signs in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De doctrina christiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.i.1): 'A sign is a thing that \softline
causes us to think of something beyond the impression the thing itself makes on the senses.  Thus, \softline
if we see a track, we think of the animal that made the track; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 if we see smoke, we know that there \softline
is a fire}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that causes it' (translation adapted from that of D. W. Robertson, Jr., italics added).  For \softline
a similar opinion see Baranski (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e i segni}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Rome: Liguori, 2000]), pp. 41-42, and Marchesi \softline
("A Rhetoric of Faith: Dante's Poetics in the Transition from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De vulgari eloquentia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 " [Doctoral disseration, Princeton University, 2002]), chapter 1, note 3.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Not only does Beatrice speak more plainly for the rest of this canto, but the \softline
poet does as well, allowing most of his verse to be more immediately understandable than is his \softline
custom.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 103-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sun takes 'slower steps' the higher it is above us, moving quickest at dawn \softline
and dusk, slowest as it approaches and departs from noon.  While the absolute position of the sun \softline
is not in doubt, the earthly observer will have a sense of the location of the meridian circle \softline
containing it that varies according to that observer's position.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante indicates to the reader that he knows very well that the rivers in the garden of \softline
Eden in fact (i.e., in Genesis 2:14) include Tigris and Euphrates (and not Lethe and Eunoe, which \softline
are here by his invention).  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.127-131.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 119.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   While it is only now that we hear Matelda's name, we have observed her actions so \softline
long that we may feel that we understand her function.  See the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVIII.1 \softline
and 40-42.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For 'reverse-acrostic' readings of 'Matelda' as 'ad letam' (the letters m-a-t-e-l-d-a \softline
backward), that is, understanding her as one who leads 'toward the joyous one' (Latin 'laetam,' \softline
spelled with an 'e' standing for the dipthong 'ae' in medieval Latin) see Enrico Morpurgo \softline
("Matelda," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Neophilologus}{\plain \fs24 \f1  34 [1950]), p. 82, and Jacques Goudet ("Une nomm{\f2\u233\'e9}e Matelda...," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Revue des {\f2\u233\'e9}tudes italiennes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1 [1954], pp. 20-60).  For still another such retrogressive anagram, \softline
the name read now as the manuscript variant 'Metelda', meaning that she leads one to the river \softline
Lethe ('ad Letem'), see Ioli ("Con Matelda nel Maryland: a colloquio con Charles Singleton," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  18 [1989]), p. 160.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Matelda did indeed tell Dante the name of this river (Eunoe) at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXVIII.131.  As opposed to his forgetting his sins in Lethe he is now forgetting the promise of \softline
that good resolution of his plight, so deeply, we may well imagine, has he been stung by Beatrice's \softline
accusations.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 128-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Only now, and in less than completely clear terms, do we learn about Matelda's \softline
function in the garden, which seems to be to serve as 'baptizer' of the souls as they finish their \softline
purification, first in Lethe (as she draws Dante through that river at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.91-102) and \softline
finally in Eunoe.  There is a dispute as to whether or not Matelda's role in the garden is Dante-specific (which it has been, from all that we have seen, until now) or 'universal' (see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVIII.40-42).  Indeed, Gianfranco Contini has argued (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Un' idea di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Turin: 
Einaudi, 1976]), p. 174n., that the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 usa}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (as you are accustomed) in the present tense should \softline
be understood as a past definite (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gi{\f3 \'42} praticasti}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [as once you used to]) and thus implies that \softline
Matelda had such a role in Dante's earlier life.  This is a case of interpreting (or indeed revising) \softline
the text in order to create or preserve a desired interpretation.  Contini's point would be worth \softline
considering except for a single, crucial, and indeed determinative final point, Matelda's last words \softline
in the poem, which are addressed to Statius (vv. 134-135): 'Now come with him.'  Thus, and only \softline
at the very last moment, we learn that Matelda's function in the garden is not limited to \softline
ministrations on behalf of Dante alone (i.e., she deals either with all the saved souls who come \softline
through here or with some of them).  (See Filippo Villani's similar view in Bellomo's edition of his \softline
commentary to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Expositio seu comentum super "Comedia" Dantis Allegherii}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Florence: Le \softline
Lettere, 1989)], p. 92, n. 90.)  To be sure, Dante alone is mentioned as receiving her ministrations \softline
at the river Lethe (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.91-105).  From this later passage, however, we are probably \softline
forced to consent to the notion that she there presided over Statius's submersion as well as \softline
Dante's, a scene that, like much involving Statius's (and Virgil's) presence in the garden, is allowed \softline
to disappear from Dante's page.  For this view see Singleton (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journey to Beatrice}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Cambridge: \softline
Harvard University Press, 1967 (1958)]), p. 181, n. 17.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This seventh and last Purgatorial address to the reader opens a new subject that \softline
the poet will share with us, the formal requirements of his poem.  If he had more space (another \softline
few lines? another canto?), he would tell us what Eunoe tasted like.  The early commentators \softline
think that he means that he has run out of cantos (i.e., he cannot have a thirty-fourth as he did for \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  Tozer (comm. to vv. 139-140) was perhaps the first to think that it was the number of \softline
verses in each }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (4720, 4755, 4758 respectively) that Dante refers to.  That is a possible \softline
hypothesis, except that we note that he had just completed the longest canto in the entire work in \softline
the preceding one (XXXII is 160 lines long), and ostensibly thus had available at least fifteen \softline
more lines.  Thomas Hart ("'Per misurar lo cerchio' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII 134] and Archimedes' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De \softline
mensura circuli}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : Some Thoughts on Approximations to the Value of Pi," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la scienza}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
ed. P. Boyde and V. Russo [Ravenna: Longo, 1995], pp. 265-335) reviews his copious work that \softline
would have us believe, among other things, that all the canto lengths of the poem were decided by \softline
Dante early on.  (For a rejoinder see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.28-32.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142-145.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrasing, with all its repeated 'ri' sounds, reminiscent of the resurrective \softline
surge at the opening of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.18), underlines the reconstituted innocence of this \softline
Adamic being.  Scartazzini (comm. to verse 144) suggests that here we should hear a resonance \softline
of St. Paul (Ephesians 4:23), 'And be renewed in the spirit of your mind.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab That the three }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  all end with the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 stelle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (stars) is no longer a surprise.  It is \softline
important to attempt to imagine the effect of this repetition on a reader who does not know that it \softline
is coming, who is suddenly jarred into realizing the pattern, into realizing the shaping force of \softline
divine beauty on this poem.\par
}}