{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 02}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This elaborate way of telling time by the position of the sun and other stars in the \softline
heavens, inopportune in hell, where the sight of the sky is denied the travelers, will be a frequent \softline
feature of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  The four main points of reference are here (and on other occasions), \softline
Jerusalem, site of the Crucifixion and thus the most significant point on earth; the Ganges, 90}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to \softline
the east; the antipodes, 180}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to the south; and C{\f2\u225\'e1}diz, in Spain, 270}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  around the circle of the \softline
meridian, a great circle arc over Jerusalem.  This makes a right angle in its intersection with the \softline
plane made by the equator, which extends into a similar great-circle arc known as the horizon.  \softline
Each of the four equidistant points covered by the meridian is six hours from the other.  Thus we \softline
are told that it was 6pm in Jerusalem, midnight over India, and dawn here at the antipodes.  The \softline
location of noon is left unexpressed, but we can understand that it is in fact over Cadiz, and may \softline
choose to understand that the omission forces us to supply this last indication and perhaps to \softline
consider that this is the place associated with Ulysses' departure on his 'mad flight' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVI.106-111), especially since the concluding verses of the last canto had so clearly reminded \softline
the reader of Ulysses' voyage (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.130-132 and Hollander, "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The \softline
New Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990], pp. 32-33).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The phrase at vv. 4-6 is complicated, but eventually comprehensible.  In the northern \softline
hemisphere, when the nights grow longer than the day after the autumn solstice, the sun appears \softline
in Libra, as a result no longer a nighttime constellation, and thus the Scales 'fall from her [night's] \softline
hand.'  However, in the northern hemisphere it is now just after the spring solstice and the night is \softline
found in Libra, while the sun is in Aries.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-12.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The mood of the travelers, compared by many, perhaps beginning with Benvenuto \softline
da Imola (comm. to this passage), to pilgrims on their way to earn indulgence for their sins, is not \softline
particularly eager.  Rather, they seem to hesitate.  Vittorio Russo ("Il canto II del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. III [Florence: Le Monnier, 1969]), p. 243, cites Hebrews 11:13-16, \softline
with its insistence on the nature of life as a pilgrimage, as relevant to this tercet.  That passage is \softline
contained in one of the most significant texts in the New Testament giving credence to the idea \softline
that those who were born before Christ were nonetheless responsible for and capable of believing \softline
in Christ to come (all of Heb. 11 insists on the faith found in the great figures of the Old \softline
Testament).  But our pilgrims seem more at home with 'Egypt' than they are eager for the New \softline
Jerusalem, as were the Hebrews themselves in the desert (see Exodus 14:11-12; 16:2-3; 17:3) \softline
because they lacked a full measure of zeal for their journey.  For a discussion of the hesitance that \softline
suffuses this canto see Gorni ({\u8220\'93}Costanza della memoria e censura dell{\u8217\'92}umano \softline
nell{\u8217\'92}Antipurgatorio,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040  54 [1982], pp. 53-70).  As Poletto (comm. to this passage) \softline
was perhaps the first to note, the phrasing here reflects that of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vita nuova}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.6, where, in a \softline
simile, Dante is unsure about the path he should pursue.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 13-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is, perhaps surprisingly, the first simile of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (there was a brief \softline
comparison at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.119-120; another at verse 11, just above).  While the first canto (vv. 19-21) \softline
involved a special relationship to Venus, this canto turns instead to Mars, treated here, as was \softline
Venus there, as morning star.  In his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , where Dante associates the first seven heavens \softline
with the liberal arts, he says (II.xiii.20-24) that Mars may be compared to Music.  He concludes \softline
(24): 'Moreover, Music attracts to itself the human spirits, which are, as it were, principally 
vapors of the heart, so that they almost completely cease their activity; this happens likewise to \softline
the entire soul when it hears music, and the virtue of all of them, as it were, runs to the spirit of \softline
sense, which receives the sound' (tr. Lansing).  We shall see that these notions will come into play \softline
when Casella sings Dante's ode to the new pilgrims at the mountain's shore later in the canto.  In \softline
his remarks on these verses, Bernardino Daniello was perhaps the first commentator to bring that \softline
passage in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to bear on this text.  But the valence of the passage as it is reflected here puts \softline
the alluring red light of Mars (and, later, listening to music, which is what Mars signifies in the \softline
earlier text) into a negative correspondence with the alacrity and whiteness of the swiftly \softline
approaching angel.  Looking west toward Mars implies turning one's back on the sunrise to the \softline
east.  Porena's commentary (to vv. 13-15) observes that Dante, as a Tuscan, was acquainted with \softline
this view of the sea, one found on the western -- and not the eastern -- shore of the Italian \softline
peninsula.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The opening verse of the simile has caused considerable difficulty because the early texts \softline
offered probably unacceptable readings and later attempts have been divided into two solutions, \softline
roughly as follows: either 'sul presso del mattino' (at the nearing of dawn) or 'sorpreso dal mattino' \softline
(covered over by the dawn).  This last is Petrocchi's solution, and we have followed it, if at a \softline
distance, in our translation.  Gabriele Frasca ("Dante, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II, 13, 44, 109.  Note filologiche ed \softline
esegetiche," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Esperienze letterarie}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9, 2 [1984]), pp. 79-81, supports Petrocchi's reading.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The gradual revelation of the approaching presence (more light, greater size, two \softline
elements of white that then resolve to three [two wings and the angel's 'body']) culminates in \softline
Virgil's recognition of the angelic nature of the steersman.  For a brief account of the nature of \softline
and doctrinal problems inherent in Dante's angelology see Alison Cornish ("Angels," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Dante \softline
Encyclopedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Richard Lansing [New York: Garland, 2000], pp. 37-45).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The term }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 galeotto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (helmsman, steersman) has been used for Phlegyas, who carried Dante \softline
and Virgil across Styx in his skiff (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VIII.17 -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 galeoto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  It had previously been used by \softline
Francesca (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.137), as a proper noun, to cast blame upon the character Gallehault in the \softline
Arthurian romance that led, according to her, to her undoing.  The present }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 galeotto}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is surely to be \softline
understood as a better-intentioned guide.  Dante has been cleansed by Virgil to be in the purified \softline
condition fitting for his presence before exactly such a being, 'il primo ministro... di paradiso' \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.98-99).  Hell had its guardian demons; purgatory has guardian angels.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's two balanced exclamations insist on the supernatural abilities of the angel.  \softline
The first has the effect of reminding us of Ulysses.  Where Ulysses made wings of oars (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXVI.135), this traveler over the same seas before the mount of purgatory requires neither oar \softline
nor sail.  The word for 'oar' was last heard in Ulysses' speech (as was the phrase 'suol marino' \softline
[ocean floor] of verse 15 at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.129).  The word for poop deck, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 poppa}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , introduced to the \softline
poem to describe Ulysses' position as captain of his ship (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.124, repeated at XXVI.140) \softline
now recurs to set this celestial steersman against his less worthy counterpart (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.43).  For \softline
this argument see Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis \softline
[virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990], pp. 34-35).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The second tercet, describing the heaven-directed wings of the angel, may remind us of \softline
Satan's (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIV.46-52) huge wings, if only by antithesis.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 38.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Lombardi, discussing this verse, pointed out that the 'uccel divino' (heavenly bird) 
stands in opposition to the demon Farfarello, a 'malvagio uccello' (filthy bird -- }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.96).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 39.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This is the first time in the poem that Dante is 'blinded by the light.'  Such scenes will \softline
recur for the rest of the two final }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This detail almost necessarily reminds us of the contrary depiction of Charon's skiff in \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.413-414), sinking into the water of the swamp beneath Aeneas's weight, as Daniello \softline
(comm. to vv. 40-42) was perhaps the first to note explicitly.  See also }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.25-27, when \softline
Dante's weight makes Phlegyas's skiff sink in the muddy water of the Styx.  And see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.136.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 44.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A much-debated text.  The vast majority of codices and of commentators prefers the \softline
variant not chosen by Petrocchi: 'tal che parea beato per iscripto' (in such manner as to seem \softline
blessed by inscription).  Petrocchi chooses the variant 'tal che faria beato pur descripto' (in such a \softline
way as to render blessed anyone who reads or hears him described).  While we strongly side with \softline
the majority view, we have followed Petrocchi here as always.  Were we to depart from him, our \softline
translation would run as follows: 'whose look made him seem inscribed in blessedness.'  See this \softline
writer's earlier opinion ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
6 [1990], p. 42): 'My own view is that the verse should be read in the spirit of Landino's gloss, \softline
which holds that he seemed 'inscribed, that is, confirmed in bliss,' in the sense (also tentatively lent \softline
support by Portirelli [comm. to vv. 44-45]) that he is written in the Book of Life' (see Apoc. \softline
20:12 and discussion in Hollander ["Dante's 'Book of the Dead': A Note on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIX, 57," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  54 (1982), pp. 31-51].  For the only other use in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of the past \softline
participle of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scrivere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as a verbal noun see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.54 -- and see the similar usage in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
I.viii.5.  In both these instances the verbal noun refers to a written document, as I believe it does \softline
here.'  Portirelli (1804) says that the angel 'seemed blessed by eternal and irrevocable decree.'  \softline
Most of the others -- the vast majority of commentators -- who read the line as 'parea beato per \softline
iscripto' interpret it to mean that the angel looks as though he were written on.  Landino, \softline
Portirelli, and Hollander believe that he seems blessed because he is inscribed elsewhere, an at \softline
least potentially more convincing reading.  Frasca ("Dante, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II, 13, 44, 109.  Note filologiche \softline
ed esegetiche," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Esperienze letterarie}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9, 2 [1984]), pp. 81-83, reopens the question of the reading \softline
of this line, but does not come to a firm conclusion about a preferable variant.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's 'more than a hundred' is a poet's allowable indefinite number, but one based \softline
on a very good number indeed, one hundred, number of God (1 + 0 + 0 = 1) and of the number of \softline
cantos in this poem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The arriving pilgrims, seated in the ship that carries them to purgation and \softline
eventual salvation, sing the Psalm of the Exodus, 114-115 in the modern Bible, 113 in the \softline
Vulgate.  The text states clearly that they sing all of it in their shared exhilaration.  For the \softline
informing pattern of the Exodus in this canto (and in the poem as a whole) see, among others, \softline
Singleton ("'In exitu Israel de Aegypto,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annual Report of the Dante Society}{\plain \fs24 \f1  78 [1960], pp. 1-24); Tucker ("'In exitu Isr{\f2\u228\'e4}el de Aegypto': the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  in the Light of the Easter Liturgy," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The American Benedictine Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  11 [1960], pp. 43-61).  Freccero (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: The Poetics of \softline
Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Rachel Jacoff [Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986]), pp. 14-15, 55-69; 
Armour ("The Theme of Exodus in the First Two Cantos of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Soundings}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , \softline
ed. David Nolan [Dublin: Irish Academic Press, 1981], pp. 59-99); and Pasquini ("Dante and the \softline
'Prefaces of Truth': from 'Figure' to 'Completion,'" }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  54 [1999], pp. 18-25).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the pertinence of typical medieval rubrics to the Psalm, which divide it into three parts \softline
(the miracle of the Exodus, the Hebrews' backsliding worship of the Golden Calf, reaffirmation of \softline
God's continuing support), a division that is seen as paralleling the three scenes of the canto \softline
(completion of the 'exodus' of the arriving souls, Casella's song as 'idolatrous,' Cato's insistence on \softline
the pilgrims' devotion to God) see Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song and the Old," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990], p. 36).  Each of these moments is assigned, as it were, a \softline
single simile that reflects its central action, the arrival of the ship (vv. 13-18), Dante's unique \softline
status as still living in the flesh (vv. 70-74), Cato's rebuke (vv. 124-132).  \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Since the words of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 incipit}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of this Psalm offer the basis for the analysis of the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as conforming to the analytical practice of allegory as practised by theologians to \softline
interpret the Bible offered in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistle to Cangrande}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , it is not surprising that those who believe \softline
that Dante is in fact the author of this document make much of its precepts in discussing this \softline
tercet.  It should be kept in mind that the citation of the Psalm here, ca. 1310, predates the \softline
composition of the epistle (ca. 1317-21).  Thus the epistle, if it is authentic (as this writer believes: \softline
see Hollander, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Epistle to Cangrande}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993] \softline
with bibliography of the debate to that date), does not describe proleptically the procedures of the \softline
poem, but reflects them.  The two most recent editors of the epistle, Thomas Ricklin (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Das \softline
Schreiben an Cangrande della Scala}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Hamburg: Meiner, 1993]) and Enzo Cecchini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistola a \softline
Cangrande}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Giunti, 1995]), both argue strongly for its authenticity.  For two attempts \softline
to counter the growing consensus that the epistle is, after all, Dante's own, see Brugnoli ("Ancora \softline
sull'}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistola a Cangrande}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Critica del testo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  1 [1998], pp. 985-1008) and Inglese ("Epistola a \softline
Cangrande: questione aperta," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Critica del testo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  2 [1999], pp. 951-74).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For this moment in which, according to a recent discussant, Dante decisively confronts \softline
and rejects the 'hard' poetics of his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 rime petrose}{\plain \fs24 \f1  for the 'liquid' poetry of salvation see Gianni \softline
Vinciguerra ("Petra / Aqua: della funzionalit{\f3 \'42} di alcuni salmi nella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Critica del testo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  3 \softline
[1999], esp. pp. 896-909).  For the program of.Psalms and hymns utilized by Dante in the \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see Antonio Mastrobuono (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Essays}{\plain \fs24 \f1  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 on Dante's Philosophy of History}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040  [Florence: \softline
Olschki, 1979], pp. 181-89); Louis La Favia ("' ...ch{\f2\u233\'e9} quivi per canti,' [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII, 113]: Dante's \softline
Programmatic Use of Psalms and Hymns in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Iconography}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9 [1984-86], \softline
pp. 53-65); and Erminia Ardissono ("I Canti liturgici nel }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  108 \softline
[1990], pp. 39-65).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Like the heavenly messenger at the walls of Dis (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.100-103), this angel, after \softline
blessing his flock, also moves away from those he has helped as quickly as possible, but on this \softline
occasion not from disgust at the place in which he finds himself, but to return to Ostia for more \softline
saved souls.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The souls fling themselves upon the shore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 si gittar}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) just as the damned fling themselves \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 gittansi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) upon Charon's boat (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.116), but with key elements in the scenes significantly \softline
reversed, though both groups are spurred by their desire for justice.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The second scene of the canto begins with the mutual pleasure and confusion of \softline
the two groups that play the major roles in it, the crowd of pilgrims and the two travelers, both 
less (in Virgil's case) and more than saved souls, since Dante is destined to return and will then be \softline
a uniquely experienced penitent.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As Bosco/Reggio point out in their commentary to these lines, all the images in \softline
them are derived from hunting.  The sun (Apollo as archer), now risen above the horizon, shoots \softline
its rays (arrows) everywhere, striking the constellation Capricorn, 90}{\plain \fs24 \super\f1 o}{\plain \fs24 \f1  from Aries.  Consequently, \softline
Capricorn moves several degrees down the sky from its highest point, where it was at dawn.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 60.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   For the resemblances of the mount of purgatory to Mt. Sinai see Carol Kaske \softline
("Mount Sinai and Dante's Mount Purgatory," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  89 [1971], pp. 1-18.).  For her the \softline
mountain is not only its former self, site of the divine gift of Ten Commandments to Moses, but a \softline
place of Christian pilgrimage under the New Law.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}\sect \sectd \sbknone\marglsxn1350\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's reply to the saved souls identifies himself and Dante as being 'pilgrims,' in the \softline
generic sense that they are travelers in a foreign land.  In a more limited and Christian sense, only \softline
Dante and the new arrivals are truly on a pilgrimage.  This is the first of nine uses of the noun or \softline
adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 peregrino}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that are distributed through the final two }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantiche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For the view that the \softline
controlling idea of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is that of a pilgrimage see, among others, John Demaray (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
and the Book of the Cosmos}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1987], pp. 1-60); \softline
Bruno Basile ("Dante e l'idea di }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 peregrinatio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il tempo e le forme: studi letterari da Dante \softline
a Gadda}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Modena: Mucchi, 1990 (1986)], pp. 9-36); Julia Holloway (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The Pilgrim and the Book}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[New York: Peter Lang, 1992], esp. pp. 57-84); and Picone ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII: il viaggio contrastato," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 L'Alighieri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9 [1997], pp. 35-50).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 65.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's recollection of the difficult journey up through hell is made to reflect the poet's \softline
own formulation in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.5 exactly: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 aspra e forte }{\plain \fs24 \f1 (dense and harsh), the adjectives there \softline
referring to the 'dark wood' of the world in which Dante found himself at the outset.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These are Virgil's last words in the canto.  In fact he nearly disappears from the scene \softline
once Dante and Casella take over center stage.  He will be mentioned as forming part of the group \softline
of those who are rapt by Casella's song (verse 115) and as departing in haste with Dante in the \softline
canto's final verse (133).  In both cases he is behaving less like a guide than like a lost soul.  In a \softline
sense, this is the protagonist's first solo flight in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a moment in which he is potentially \softline
in command of the situation.  His success is hardly dazzling.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Satan, with his three heads, had seemed a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 maraviglia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to the protagonist in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXXIV.37.  In the last canto it was the miraculous 'resurrection' of the Christlike humble plant \softline
(verse 134) that had seemed a 'wonder' to him.  Now it is }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 he}{\plain \fs24 \f1  who causes wonder in the onlookers, \softline
since he is present in the flesh.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-74.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This second simile of the canto compares Dante's living visage to the olive branch \softline
carried by a messenger of peace.  In other words, his very presence in this precinct is an additional \softline
assurance to the new souls that God's justice and promise of a kingdom of peace as the final haven \softline
for a Christian life was truly offered and truly kept.  They have arrived, even if the way before \softline
them is uncertain and difficult, since they still have to perform their ritual cleansing of even the 
memory of sin.  While the earliest commentators do not cite a Virgilian source for the simile, \softline
beginning with Daniello (comm. to vv. 70-71), who was followed by Lombardi (comm. to vv. 70-71), Portirelli (comm. to vv. 65-70), Tommaseo (comm. to vv. 70-72), and Scartazzini (comm. to \softline
verse 70), later ones point to two possible Virgilian sources: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.115-116 and XI.100-101.  Andreoli (comm. to verse 70) cites only the first of these.  In the second, messengers from \softline
the camp of Turnus, holding up olive branches, seek permission of Aeneas to gather the bodies of \softline
the dead for burial; in the first it is Aeneas himself, standing upon the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 puppis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (quarterdeck) of his \softline
ship, who holds forth the branch of peace to Pallas, son of Evander.  Pallas is amazed (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 obstipuit}{\plain \fs24 \f1  -- \softline
verse 121) by Aeneas's cordial gesture and accedes to it.  The entire context there seems to fit the \softline
details of Dante's scene better, Dante as Aeneas 'invading' the homeland of those with whom he \softline
will be allied.  As Hollander has pointed out ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura \softline
Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990], p. 37), the ominous undertones present in Virgil's scene (Aeneas will \softline
in fact bring not peace but war, one in which Pallas will become the central sacrificial partner) \softline
seem necessarily excluded here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This final detail, on the other hand, does inject a note of moral tension, since it reveals \softline
the predisposition of these souls to linger where they are rather than to proceed upward.  See the \softline
note to vv. 10-12.  Their openness to negligence begins the conflict narrated in this second section \softline
of the canto, in which Casella's song will so engage them that they will finally have to be chastised \softline
by Cato.  See Francesco da Buti's comment to this verse, insisting on 'their negligence, which \softline
follows from their delight in wordly things.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The verse carries an overtone of a line in the passage from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  describing the effect of \softline
Mars as music, moving the hearers to such a state that they 'quasi cessano da ogni operazione' \softline
(almost completely cease their activity).  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.13-18.  Dante is, in effect, \softline
their 'music,' and they respond more to the miracle of his fleshly presence than to the sign of God's \softline
love that it gives, and which should be acknowledged.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-78.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This as yet unidentified soul (we will learn his name, Casella, at verse 91) has \softline
recognized Dante and advances to embrace him; Dante, filled with a proper Christian affection, \softline
responds to his embracer's emotion without any personalization, returning love for love without \softline
earthly distinctions.  It is a very good beginning for a pilgrim in purgatory.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 79-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This much-admired scene is modeled on another, but which one?  Virgil's epic \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.792-794 and VI.700-702) contains three identical lines of verse describing a failed \softline
embrace.  The first commentators opt for the latter, Aeneas's attempt to hold fast Anchises' \softline
paternal ghost.  But John of Serravalle, in his commentary to these lines, thinks, in a departure \softline
from that opinion, of Aeneas's identical effort to embrace the dead form of his wife, Creusa, in the \softline
second book.  He was followed by Vellutello (comm. to vv. 79-87).  Modern commentators \softline
almost universally return to the more familiar scene in Book VI, and it has been rare in the last \softline
century of glossing to find anyone even contemplating the earlier scene involving Creusa.  One \softline
would expect, perhaps, that commentators would at least discuss their options.  But such is not the \softline
case.  For reasons to prefer the less favored text, see Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song \softline
and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990], p. 38 [but see his earlier identical view \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: Cato's Rebuke and Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scoglio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  52 [1975], p. 349)]), pointing out that \softline
(1) the poet will later and unmistakably refer to Aeneas's attempted embrace of Anchises (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . 
XV.25-27) and arguing that it would be less than likely for him to do so here as well, since he had \softline
two such moments to choose from; (2) the context, in which Casella will shortly be singing a song \softline
of love to Dante, would argue for the greater appropriateness of Creusa to Anchises.  One \softline
discussant argues for a double reference here; see George Economou ("Self-Consciousness of \softline
Poetic Activity in Dante and Langland," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Vernacular Poetics in the Middle Ages}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Lois Ebin \softline
[Kalamazoo: Medieval Institute Publications, 1984]), p. 180.  (For the supposed program of 'failed' \softline
embraces in this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.130-136.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the apostrophe of the 'empty shades, except in seeming' see, as Tommaseo suggested in \softline
1837, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.36, the phrase 'lor vanit{\f3 \'42} che par persona' (their emptiness, which seems real \softline
bodies).  The shades of the gluttons there and of all posthumous souls have this in common, but we \softline
must wait for Statius's long disquisition in canto XXV to learn how the 'aerial body' of the dead is \softline
produced.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 83.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Casella's smile is the first one we have seen since Limbo, when Virgil smiled to see the \softline
poets of antiquity welcome Dante as they prepared to include him in their noble company (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IV.99).  Smiles, understandably absent from the visages of those in hell, will be more frequent in \softline
purgatory, some dozen of them, and still more so in paradise (two dozen).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Only after Dante hears Casella's voice does he recognize him, so distant seems the \softline
world of earth.  See the entirely similar moment with Forese Donati (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIII.43-45) and one \softline
somewhat similar with his sister Piccarda (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.58-63).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Both Dante and Casella are eager to stay and converse; we will soon enough understand \softline
that, for all the humanity and pleasantness of their attitudes, Cato has other plans for them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Casella, finally named, was obviously, from the context of the scene, a musician.  That \softline
is really all we know with any certainty about him.  Nonetheless, it is clear that he is someone \softline
whom Dante actually knew.  Whether he was from Florence or Pistoia (or even Siena -- the \softline
commentators are puzzled and offer these possibilities, most of them plumping for Florence) we do \softline
not know.  Whether he actually set one or more of Dante's poems to music we do not know.  For \softline
some sense of his possible identity and activity see Luigi Peirone, 'Casella' (ED.1970.1); Fabio \softline
Bisogni ("Precisazioni sul Casella dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quadrivium}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1971(1974)], pp. 81-91) and \softline
Mahmoud Salem Elsheikh ("I musicisti di Dante [Casella, Lippo, Schochetto] in Nicol{\f3 \'62} de' Rossi," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  48 [1971], esp. pp. 156-58).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It comes as something of a surprise to realize that Dante has not spoken since }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXXIV.100-105.  His silence in the first canto of the new }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is probably meant to suggest the \softline
awe he feels in this new, mysterious, and sacred place.  Casella, representing the familiarity of \softline
Tuscany, allows him to break the spell.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Casella has evidently been dead some time (for at least slightly more than three \softline
months, as verse 98 will make plain) and Dante wonders why he has been so long between death \softline
and his first step toward salvation, arrival in purgatory.  Beginning with Poletto (comm. to vv.  94-99) and Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , First Series: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Scripture and Classical Authors in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: \softline
Clarendon, 1969 (1896)], p. 168, commentators have seen a connection here with Charon's \softline
unwillingness to take certain of the waiting shades across Acheron (they all are eager to be taken) \softline
and in fact picking and choosing among the waiting throng (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VI.315-316).  We might continue 
the thought: In Dante's poem Charon takes all bound for hell at once; only those bound for \softline
purgatory need to be winnowed by the transporting angel, with some having to stay longer in the \softline
world, near Ostia, thus mirroring a sort of prepurgation that the poet has invented, offstage, as it \softline
were. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Casella's startling narrative at times escapes the sort of attention it requires.  This \softline
is what we learn: Before the Jubilee Year's plenary indulgence announced by Pope Boniface in \softline
February 1300 (retroactive to Christmas of 1299), all those who came to the region around Ostia, \softline
where the souls of the saved are gathered, had to await the pleasure of the angel to be taken \softline
aboard the ship that we have just seen Casella and the others disembark from.  Before 25 \softline
December 1299, Casella was denied many times a seat in the ship.  We are forced to understand \softline
that he was not gifted with a particularly energetic desire for God; i.e., he was a perfect 'brother' to \softline
the Dante we meet at the beginning of this canto, a man like those 'who think about the way and in \softline
their hearts go on -- while still their bodies linger' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.11-12).  Purgatory is thus divided into \softline
three spaces: the mountain of purgation itself, ante-purgatory, and 'pre-ante-purgatory,' located \softline
somewhere never described but at or near Ostia.  And the laws of this place themselves underwent \softline
a change in late 1299, for after that date }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 anyone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  who wanted to depart for the 'holy land' would be \softline
accommodated by the angel.  (Dante has apparently, on no authority but his own, decided that the \softline
plenary indulgence for sinners extended to the souls of the justified dead as well.)  This requires \softline
that we understand that during the past three months Casella }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 did not want}{\plain \fs24 \f1  to travel south toward \softline
heaven.  Given his behavior once he arrives at the shore, however, this is not totally surprising.  \softline
Finally, precisely three months after the merciful decree was made, he decided that he wanted to \softline
leave.  The date: 25 March 1300, the Florentine New Year.  Is it coincidence that this, the most \softline
likely date for the beginning of Dante's journey (see the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.1; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.11; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.19-21), \softline
is also that on which Casella probably set out?  Whether or not it is, we have the delightful \softline
spectacle of these two miraculous voyagers, each starting somewhere in Italy, one gliding over the \softline
seas, the other moving under the earth, arriving at the antipodes within minutes of one another, \softline
reunited in friendship and peace.  (Poletto's discussion [comm. to vv. 94-99] of some of these \softline
problems is one of the few in which these complex matters are closely and suggestively examined.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist's language is laced with diametrically opposed terms: 'new law' \softline
and 'songs of love.'  Merely hearing them, one intuits that there is an oppositional relationship \softline
between them.  Daniello's commentary (1568) asserts that there is indeed a 'new law' in purgatory, \softline
where 'one does not sing vain and lascivious things, but hymns and psalms in praise of God, and \softline
prays to Him.'  In this first confrontation, looking ahead to the song not yet sung, the 113th Psalm \softline
is that of the 'New Law,' and is juxtaposed against the love song that Dante wrote for a woman in \softline
the last century.  It is this kind that, earthbound as he now again is, the protagonist longs for.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Petrocchi's text for verse 108 reads 'doglie' (sorrows) and not 'voglie' (longings).  Hardly \softline
any Dantist currently admires this choice, and the vast majority urges a return to the 1921 reading, \softline
including the translators.  For one of the stronger arguments for such a return see Gorni \softline
({\u8220\'93}Costanza della memoria e censura dell{\u8217\'92}umano nell{\u8217\'92}Antipurgatorio,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040  54 (1982]), \softline
pp. 67-70; see also Frasca ("Dante, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II, 13, 44, 109.  Note filologiche ed esegetiche," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Esperienze letterarie}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9, 2 [1984]), pp. 83-88.  And see the similar locution (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.41): 'lor disio \softline
quetato,' where the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 quetare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is joined to a word for desire or longing.  Once again, we have \softline
followed Petrocchi, despite our disagreement.  But see Sanguineti's edition (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dantis Alagherii 
Comedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Edizioni del Galluzzo, 2001]) which prints }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 voglie}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's soul, wearied by his bodily weight, remembers his condition at the beginning \softline
of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.22: in simile, his mind, in stress, is like the breath of a man escaping from death by \softline
drowning, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 affannata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (laboring).  If he seems better off now than he was then, he is still in \softline
considerable difficulty.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Casella's song is Dante's song, the second }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  found in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  It was \softline
composed in celebration of Lady Philosophy.  That sounds innocent or even positive.  On the other \softline
hand, she is, early on in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , specifically designated as having replaced Beatrice in Dante's \softline
affections.  Within the confines of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  this is not problematic.  In the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , in which \softline
Beatrice is the moving force for so much, it is.  And thus some critics have embraced what seems \softline
at first an unlikely position: that Dante is here denigrating his affection for that lady.  For this \softline
argument see Ann Hallock ("Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 selva oscura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and Other Obscure }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 selva}{\plain \fs24 \f1 s," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Forum Italicum}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 \softline
[1972]), pp. 72-74, and Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: Cato's Rebuke and Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scoglio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  52 \softline
[1975]), pp. 353-55.  For a restatement of the more traditional view see Ignazio Baldelli \softline
("Linguistica e interpretazione: l'amore di Catone, di Casella, di Carlo Martello e le canzoni del \softline
{\u171\'ab}Convivio{\u187\'bb} II e III," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellanea di studi linguistici in onore di Walter Belardi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. \softline
Cipriano, P. Di Giovine, M. Mancini, vol. II [Rome: n. p., 1996], esp. p. 549).  As long ago as \softline
1955 Fausto Montanari ("Il canto secondo del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Humanitas}{\plain \fs24 \f1  10 [1955], pp. 359-63) \softline
interpreted the scene as being essentially oppositional, a position that was redeveloped in the 1970s \softline
by Freccero (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: The Poetics of Conversion}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Rachel Jacoff [Cambridge: Harvard University \softline
Press, 1986], pp. 186-94) and Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: Cato's Rebuke and Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scoglio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  52 [1975], pp. 348-63) and followed by several others, including Gorni ({\u8220\'93}Costanza della \softline
memoria e censura dell{\u8217\'92}umano nell{\u8217\'92}Antipurgatorio,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Studi Danteschi}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040  54 [1982], pp. 58-62; \softline
Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984]), pp. 31-40; and Edoardo \softline
Sanguineti ("Infernal Acoustics: Sacred Song and Earthly Song," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 \softline
[1990]), pp. 74-77.  For medieval musical theory as supporting this conception of an oppositional \softline
strategy in the structuring of the canto's two songs Amilcare see Iannucci ("Casella's Song and the \softline
Tuning of the Soul," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thought}{\plain \fs24 \f1  65 [1990]), pp. 42-44.  But for general opposition to such ways of \softline
reading the episode see Baldelli ("Linguistica e interpretazione: l'amore di Catone, di Casella, di \softline
Carlo Martello e le canzoni del {\u171\'ab}Convivio{\u187\'bb} II e III," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Miscellanea di studi linguistici in onore di \softline
Walter Belardi}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. P. Cipriano, P. Di Giovine, M. Mancini, vol. II [Rome: n. p., 1996], pp. 535-55), and Muresu ("L'inno e il canto d'amore,"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  La Rassegna della letteratura italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  104 [2000], \softline
pp. 5-48).  For a rejoinder to Hollander see Pertile ("Dante, lo scoglio e la vesta," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Da una riva e \softline
dall'altra: Studi in onore di Antonio D'Andrea}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Dante Della Terza [Florence: Edizioni Cadmo, \softline
1995]), p. 91.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 \softline
[1990], p. 39), noted that Cato's rejecting attitude toward Marcia is to be contrasted with Dante's \softline
apparent affection for the lady of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For discussions of the possibility that Casella actually set this }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 canzone}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Dante see Mario \softline
Marti ({\u8220\'93}Dolcezza di memorie ed assoluto etico nel canto di Casella [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040 . II],{\u8221\'94} in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1\lang1040 Studi su \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1\lang1040  [Galatina: Congedo, 1984 (1962)]), pp. 81-88, and Fabio Bisogni ("Precisazioni sul Casella \softline
dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quadrivium}{\plain \fs24 \f1  12 [1971 (1974)]), pp. 81-91.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 113-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sweetness of the song is memorable even now, says the poet.  One can see \softline
why most readers of this scene take these words as confirming the poet's approval of a positive \softline
feeling.  But see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVI.19-24, where the poet 'grieves again' as he 'grieved then' for the \softline
lost Ulysses.  Both Ulysses and his own Convivial ode are marked as temptations the strength of \softline
which are both still vividly felt by him, even though he now knows better than to accede to them.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In this context James Chiampi ("Augustinian }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Distentio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and the Structure of \softline
Dante's Purgatory," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Canadian Journal of Italian Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  18 [1995], pp. 1-21) discusses the \softline
pertinence for Dante of Augustine's discussion of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 distentio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , distraction that leads away from truth.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-121.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Cato's return was not in program, as is clear from verse 106 in the previous \softline
canto.  He evidently believed that this specially privileged Christian visitor to purgatory would \softline
know how to behave better than he does.  But now he has not only backslid himself, but is \softline
involving the whole new contingent of the saved into behaving similarly.  Cato sounds exactly like \softline
St. Paul, urging them all to 'put off the old man and put on the new' (Ephesians 4:22; Colossians \softline
3:9).  For the closeness of Dante's thought here to Colossians 2 and 3, see Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
II: The New Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990], pp. 40-41): 'And Cato's \softline
identity here is not only Pauline, for the scene is clearly reminiscent of Moses's discovery of the \softline
falsely worshipping Hebrews before that golden calf (Exodus 32:18-19 -- see Carol Kaske \softline
["Mount Sinai and Dante's Mount Purgatory," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  89 (1971), pp. 1-18] which the text \softline
of Psalm 113 had already set before the minds of all who listened to what their own lips were \softline
singing only moments before.  Echoing God's command and Moses's compliance ('neither let the \softline
flocks nor herds feed before that mount' -- Exodus 34:3), Cato sends the music-lovers flying.'  For \softline
the Pauline references see also Paola Rigo (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Memoria classica e memoria biblica in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Florence: Olschki, 1994]), pp. 93-94.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 122.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The deeper significance of the word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scoglio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (slough) is the subject of Lino Pertile's \softline
careful analysis ("Dante, lo scoglio e la vesta," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Da una riva e dall'altra: Studi in onore di \softline
Antonio D'Andrea}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. Dante Della Terza [Florence: Edizioni Cadmo, 1995]) of the patristic \softline
sources for the concept of the rind, the remains, as in the shed hide or skin of a dead creature, \softline
which show that the central motif, deriving from Genesis 3:21, Colossians 3:9-10, and texts found \softline
in Gregory of Nyssa, Ambrose, and Augustine, involves the animal skins put on by Adam and Eve \softline
to hide their guilty nakedness after the Fall (thus garbing the 'old man' in dead garments, symbolic \softline
of his own mortality) and the injunction of Paul to put off the old tunic of fleshliness in order to put \softline
on the new life of faith in Christ.  This writer is in accord with Pertile's general interpretation of \softline
this image, but continues to believe that the context of the passage, which sets the Convivial ode \softline
against the 113th Psalm, urges us to understand that Dante's earlier ode, by sliding back away from \softline
veneration of Beatrice, is a record of his previous sinful intellectual and affective activity.  For \softline
arguments parallel to Pertile's, denying that Cato's rebuke of Dante involves the ode, see Scott \softline
("Dante and Philosophy," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Annali d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  8 [1990], pp. 258-77).  For both these writers \softline
Cato's rebuke is only general, referring to the necessarily sinful condition of these saved souls \softline
before they undergo their purgation.  Those who believe the central resonance of the two songs in \softline
Dante himself necessarily involves a recantation of some of his earlier views naturally find this \softline
scene filled with reminiscence of his earlier divagations from Beatrice and the true way to God.  \softline
This is one aspect of a major dispute among Dantists at this time and involves the central question 
of the intellectual biography of the poet.  For another dimension of the dispute, see the discussion \softline
of the 'sweet new style' in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.55-63.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Those who argue that Cato is being overzealous should pay closer attention to this \softline
strong charge he makes against the negligent spirits.  Whatever the 'slough' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 scoglio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) signifies, their \softline
adherence to it prevents their seeing God.  In the world of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that can never be a slight \softline
problem.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 124-132.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This third and final simile of the canto likens the new pilgrims to doves (for the \softline
three programmatic references to these birds in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here and in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . V.82 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXV.19, see Shoaf ["Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 colombi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and the Figuralism of Hope in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Divine Comedy}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante \softline
Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  93 (1975), pp. 27-59]).  And see Hollander ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song and the Old," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 [1990], p. 41): 'Their saved souls hunger on high, but their \softline
appetitive natures are not yet wrung dry of earthly longing.  Thus they are careless in their \softline
ingestion (see Matthew 13:36-43) for the parable of the wheat and the tares alluded to in their \softline
failure to make a decision between 'biado o loglio').  If music be the food of love, there is also a \softline
heavenly music.  We and the pilgrims know that this is true.  They have sung it themselves in this \softline
very place.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The final verse, in its understated brevity, conveys a feeling for the two travelers' \softline
guilty acceptance of Cato's command and their hasty departure in shame.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab 'The second canto of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  dramatizes the need for interpretation by presenting \softline
two songs to its audience, the arriving pilgrims.  It is clear that we comprise a still more crucial \softline
audience.  Most of us have chosen to follow the lead of the one whom we take to be our leader, \softline
Dante himself.  (His several intellectually or morally flawed responses as he moved through Inferno \softline
have not, apparently, been cogent enough sign of his frequent inadequacy as guide to our \softline
reactions.)  He, lost in the beauty of his own old song, either fails to understand or else forgets the \softline
message of the new song which he has heard first, and which should have served as a rein on his \softline
enthusiasm.  It is as old as Exodus and as new as the dawn which brings it, this Easter Sunday \softline
morning on the shore of the mountain.  Even its angelic sanction has not prevented most of us \softline
from leaving the theater humming the other song, that lovely little Italian air, "Amor che ne la \softline
mente mi ragiona."  One can only imagine Dante's reaction as he hears us go out, back into the \softline
night' (Hollander, "}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II: The New Song and the Old," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis [virginiana]}{\plain \fs24 \f1  6 \softline
[1990], p. 41).\par
}}