{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 22}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The scene with the angel, which we expect, having experienced such a scene at the \softline
end of the description of each terrace, is here done retrospectively and as briefly as possible.  The \softline
giving of directions to the next terrace and the removal of Dante's (fifth) P are referred to simply \softline
as having occurred.  The remembered angelic recital of a Beatitude (here the fourth, Matthew 5:6, \softline
'Bless{\f3 \'50}d are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness [justice, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 iustitiam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , in the Vulgate], for \softline
they shall be filled') is given in truncated form.  Responding to this economy, Benvenuto (comm. \softline
to vv. 1-3) refers to Dante's 'novum modum scribendi' (new way of writing).  What exactly was \softline
omitted from the Beatitude has been a subject of discussion, but it clearly seems to be 'hunger and' \softline
(saved to be deployed, words more appropriate to Gluttony, at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXIV.154) and perhaps the \softline
ending as well ('for they shall be filled'), possibly omitted in both utterances.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is as though the poet were clearing every inch of available space for the second scene \softline
with Statius, and indeed the arrival at the Terrace of Gluttony will be postponed for over a \softline
hundred lines (until verse 115), the longest such intermezzo we find among the seven terraces.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab From verse 3 it seems inferentially clear that Statius does not have what would have been \softline
his final P removed.  Dante describes his own letter being removed from his brow by the angel \softline
('avendo}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  dal viso un colpo raso' [having erased another swordstroke from my brow]).  Had he \softline
wanted to include Statius as having the same experience, he would only have to have written \softline
'avendo}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ci}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ' (from }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 our}{\plain \fs24 \f1  brows).  Thus, like all 'regular' penitents, it seems most likely that Statius did \softline
not have his brow adorned by the writing of the warder at the gate of purgatory.  See the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.22-24.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7-9.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We are reminded of Dante's increasing similarity to the unburdened souls of the \softline
disembodied.  Traversing two more terraces will make him as light as they.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's charming fiction has it that Juvenal (for the reason behind the choice of \softline
him as praiser of Statius see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.88), arriving in Limbo ca. A.D. 140, told \softline
Virgil of Statius's great affection, which then caused a similar affection in Virgil for the unknown \softline
Statius.  Benvenuto (comm. to these verses) offers a sweet-tempered gloss to this passage: 'Often \softline
we love a virtuous man, even if we have never met him -- and in just this way do I love dead \softline
Dante.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil wraps his delicate yet intrusive question in pledges of friendship, and then \softline
asks Statius how such as he could have been stained by the sin of avarice.  The phrase 'tra cotanto \softline
senno' (amidst such wisdom) recalls the identical words found at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.102, and thus \softline
reminds us of the five classical poets encountered there by Dante.  It may also remind us that \softline
Limbo is precisely where anybody else would have assumed Statius would spend eternity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-26.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   As Benvenuto (comm. to vv. 25-27) says, 'Statius now smiles at Virgil's mistake \softline
just as Dante had smiled, earlier [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.109], at Statius's mistake.'  Statius is also obviously \softline
allowed to be pleased to have been guilty of prodigality rather than avarice, no matter how \softline
seriously Dante took the latter sin.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-35.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A paraphrase may help make clear the general sense of these lines: 'As my 
situation among the avaricious made you take me for one of them -- and a better understanding \softline
shows the opposite sin to pertain, just so did your text seem to be condemning avarice -- until my \softline
personal understanding revealed that it condemned my own prodigality.'  On the problem of the \softline
belatedness of prodigality's appearance as a subject on this terrace, of which it is supposedly the \softline
cotitular occupant, see Barnes ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX," in  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy," Introductory \softline
Readings II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, \softline
Charlottesville: University of Virginia, 1993]), pp. 288-90.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 36.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius has already said (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXI.68) that he had to spend five hundred years and \softline
more on this terrace, thus more than six thousand months.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 38.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The verb used by Statius to indicate his comprehension of Virgil's text will turn out to \softline
be pivotal, in that he does not say 'when I read' but 'when I understood,' i.e., allowing us to \softline
comprehend his latent meaning: 'when I construed your text so that it matched my need.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 40-41.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The meaning of these lines, clearly a translation of a text of Virgil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aen}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . III.56-57), \softline
is the subject of much debate involving questions about the exact nature of what Dante wrote \softline
('Per che' or 'perch{\f2\u233\'e9}'?) and what he took Virgil to mean (or decided to make Virgil say).  Here, as \softline
always, we have followed Petrocchi's text in our translation, even though in this case we are in \softline
particularly strenuous disagreement with him.  Here are the texts, Virgil's first:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 \ul0 \tab Quid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  non mortalia pectora }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cogis}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab auri }{\plain \fs24 \ul\f1 sacra}{\plain \fs24 \f1  fames?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (to what do you not drive human hearts, impious hunger for gold?)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 As for Dante's text, it may be either of the following:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab   }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 Per che}{\plain \fs24 \f1  non }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 reggi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  tu, o }{\plain \fs24 \ul\f1 sacra}{\plain \fs24 \f1  fame\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab de l'oro, l'appetito de' mortali?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (}{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 to what end}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , O }{\plain \fs24 \ul\f1 curs{\f3 \'50}d}{\plain \fs24 \f1  hunger for gold, / do you not }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 govern}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [drive] the appetite of mortals?)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 or\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab   }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 Perch{\f2\u233\'e9}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  non }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 reggi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  tu, o }{\plain \fs24 \ul\f1 sacra}{\plain \fs24 \f1  fame\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab de l'oro, l'appetito de' mortali?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 (}{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 why}{\plain \fs24 \f1  do you not }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 govern}{\plain \fs24 \f1  mortal appetites, O }{\plain \fs24 \ul\f1 holy}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [i.e., temperate] hunger for gold?)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 It is true that the Latin adjective}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  sacer}{\plain \fs24 \f1  can mean either 'holy, sacred' or 'unholy, impious.'  \softline
However, the meaning of Aeneas's outcry, recounting the horrific deed committed by \softline
Polymnestor against Polydorus (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.31-39) is clear to all; he means 'impious.'  \softline
But what of Dante's text?  The 'traditional' reading has him maintaining the negative valence of \softline
Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sacer}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (which would then be the only occurrence among twelve in which }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sacro}{\plain \fs24 \f1  does not \softline
mean 'holy' in his poem -- see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXVII.91, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.134, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.38, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.40, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXXI.1, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.114, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VI.7, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XII.62, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.64, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.73, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXV.1, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  
XXXII.21).  But see Jacopo della Lana (comm. to vv. 37-42) who reads the lines exactly as \softline
modern 'revisionists' do, as does the Anonimo Fiorentino (comm. to vv. 37-42), who also realizes \softline
that Statius needed to understand the lines as condemning prodigality and not avarice and thus \softline
adjusted their meaning to fit his own condition.  Perhaps no early reader, among those who \softline
understood Statius as deliberately misreading Virgil, was as 'modern' and 'revisionist' as Francesco \softline
da Buti (comm. to vv. 25-54), who simply argued that Dante was deliberately giving Virgil's text \softline
another meaning than it held because it suited his purpose to do so.  A similar, if more cautious, \softline
reading is found in Venturi (comm. to vv. 38-41), blamed by Andreoli (comm. to these lines) for \softline
his 'absurd supposition.'  Bianchi (comm. to these lines) is the first to appreciate the absurdity of \softline
the notion that Dante had used the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 reggere}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (to govern) in a pejorative sense.  The debate \softline
continues into our own day, mainly propelled by the notion that Dante could not possibly have \softline
misunderstood Virgil's words and therefore did not grossly misrepresent them.  This, however, is \softline
to overlook the fact that it is the character Statius who is understanding them as they took on \softline
significance for him, guilty of prodigality, not of avarice.  And just as he will later reveal his \softline
'misinterpretation' of Virgil's fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1  at vv. 70-72, a 'misreading' that saved his soul, so \softline
now he shows how his moral rehabilitation was begun when he 'misread' a passage in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  \softline
The debate is finally in such condition that this view, present in some of the earliest commentators \softline
but energetically attacked over the centuries, now may seem only sensible.  See, among others, \softline
Alessandro Ronconi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Interpretazioni grammaticali}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Padua: Liviana, 1958]), pp. 85-86; Feliciana \softline
Groppi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante traduttore}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 2nd ed. [Rome: Editrice "Orbis Catholicus" Herder, 1962]), pp. 163-68; Ettore Paratore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Tradizione e struttura in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Sansoni, 1968]), pp. 73-75; \softline
Robert Hollander ("The Tragedy of Divination in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (Ravenna: \softline
Longo, 1980]), pp. 212-13, and Hollander (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1   \softline
[Florence: Olschki, 1983]), pp. 86-89, completely in accord with R.A. Shoaf's earlier and nearly \softline
identical reading ("'Auri sacra fames' and the Age of Gold [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII, 40-41 and 148-150]," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  96 [1978], pp. 195-99).  They are joined by Teodolinda Barolini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's Poets}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984]), p. 260, and, at length, by Ronald Martinez ("La \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 sacra fame dell'oro}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  22, 41] tra Virgilio e Stazio: dal testo all'interpretazione," \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letture classensi}{\plain \fs24 \f1  18 [1989], pp. 177-93).  A similar, if less developed argument, is found in \softline
Giuseppe Mazzotta (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante, Poet of the Desert}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979]), p. \softline
222.  And, for wholehearted acceptance of Shoaf's argument, see Michelangelo Picone \softline
("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante's "Divine Comedy," Introductory Readings II: "Purgatorio,"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ed. \softline
Tibor Wlassics [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lectura Dantis (virginiana)}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 12, supplement, Charlottesville: University of \softline
Virginia, 1993]), pp. 325-26.  Neglected, by all but Barolini and Shoaf, is H.D. Austin ("}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aurea \softline
Justitia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : A Note on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , XXII, 40f," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  48 [1933], pp. 327-30).  \softline
Mainly forgotten as well is the then daring support of Francesco da Buti by Alfredo Galletti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il \softline
canto XXII del "Purgatorio"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  ["Lectura Dantis Orsanmichele," Florence: Sansoni, n.d. (read in \softline
1909)]), pp. 17-18.  Among Italian students of the problem who accept this basic view of its \softline
resolution see Massimiliano Chiamenti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Alighieri traduttore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Lettere, 1995]), \softline
pp. 131-37, who offers most of the essential bibliography for the problem but is, however, \softline
surprisingly unaware of the support for his position available in his American precursors' analyses \softline
of what he considers 'the most beautiful example of free translation in Dante' (p. 134).  For the \softline
general question of Dante's Statius see Giorgio Brugnoli ("Stazio in Dante," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cultura Neolatina}{\plain \fs24 \f1  29 \softline
[1969], pp. 117-25) and Luca Carlo Rossi ("Prospezioni filologiche per lo Stazio di Dante," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la "bella scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f3 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. A. A. Iannucci [Ravenna: 
Longo, 1993], pp. 205-24).  For more recent bibliography see Diana Glenn (Women in Limbo: \softline
Arbitrary Listings or Textual Referents?  Mapping the Connections in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  117 [1999]), p. 114; and Simone Marchesi ("Dante's 'active' hermeneutics \softline
in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII: Virgil and Statius as readers of poetry," article awaiting publication), offering \softline
an extended discussion of the possible Augustinian sources of the 'aggressive' reading of Virgilian \softline
text attributed to Statius by Dante.  For yet another inconclusive and unconvincing attempt to \softline
deal with the problematic passage as not involving a 'misreading,' offering a slight and probably \softline
unacceptable twist to the traditional reading, 'per che' should be undertood as 'quid' in the sense of \softline
'quomodo' (in English perhaps translated as 'in how many ways,' said in such a way as to express a \softline
certain irony), see Paolo Baldan ("Stazio e le possibili 'vere ragion che son nascose' della sua \softline
conversione [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII.40-41],"}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1  Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24 \f1  38 [1986], pp. 149-65).  However, for a \softline
stinging rebuke to Petrocchi's philological procedures here (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Commedia secondo l'antica \softline
vulgata}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Lettere, 1994 (1967)], vol. III, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), see Maurizio Palma di Cesnola \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Questioni danteschi: "Fiore", "Monarchia", "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 2003]), p. 79n.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius's description of the prodigal as having shorn hair repeats that element in the \softline
description of those damned for prodigality in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VII.57.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 47.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The fact that, according to Statius, the prodigal do not understand that their behavior \softline
is sinful underlines the importance of Virgil's words about the 'holy' hunger for gold in bringing \softline
about his own salvation.  Their ignorance of their own sinfulness may help explain why there is so \softline
little reference to their form of sin on this terrace.  See discussion in the note to vv. 52-54.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The reference of the adverb 'qui' (here) in this tercet is a matter of debate.  One \softline
should be aware that the notion that it refers to all of purgatory (rather than to this terrace alone) \softline
is of recent vintage and is intelligently opposed by Bosco/Reggio (comm. to these verses).  \softline
Further, if one examines all eighteen uses of the adverb by penitents who have speaking roles on \softline
the mountain, it is plain that only twice does it not refer to the particular terrace on which the \softline
speaker is found.  The only speakers who employ 'qui' to refer to the mountain generally are \softline
Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.43) and Forese Donati (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.109).  All others indicate only the \softline
present terrace, as follows: Oderisi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XI.70, XI.72, XI.88, XI.89, XI.122); Sapia (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XIII.107); Pope Adrian (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIX.114, XIX.115, XIX.129, XIX.12; Hugh Capet (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XX.111, XX.122); Statius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII.51); Forese (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIII.66, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg. }{\plain \fs24 \f1 XXIV.16, XXIV.49).  \softline
In short, there is every reason to believe that the reference is only to this particular terrace, the \softline
only one on which a particular sin and its opposite are purged.  None of the early commentators, \softline
in fact, even thinks of the possibility of such a strange interpretation, which has Statius belatedly \softline
present a general rule for purgatory only here, and which would have us imagine that on the \softline
Terrace of Pride there were those who were abject, as well as, on that of Envy, souls who gave \softline
away their necessary belongings in an excess of charity, etc., thus justifying the notion that Dante \softline
had bought into the Aristotelian notion of the 'golden mean' in order to structure the moral order \softline
of purgatory.  That such was the case for avarice and prodigality in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  seems clear from the \softline
treatment of these two aspects of a single sin (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.25-30).  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
IV.xvii.7 Dante does speak of the golden mean as an encompassing moral standard: 'Each of these \softline
virtues has two related enemies, that is, vices, one through excess and the other through shortfall.  \softline
These virtues constitute the mean between them, and they spring from a single source, namely 
from our habit of good choice' (tr. Lansing).  It is possible that Dante was planning to build the \softline
unwritten final eleven chapters of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Convivio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  on the base of Aristotle's eleven moral virtues (see \softline
Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante: A Life in Works}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001)], p. 49), but such a \softline
plan obviously was not used for the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The commentators were late to imagine that Statius's remark was meant to indicate a \softline
general law.  A first tentative movement in this direction occurs only with Lombardi (comm. to \softline
vv. 49-50).  And it was only in the twentieth century that more definitive judgments began to be \softline
expressed, first by Torraca (comm to these lines) and then most blatantly by Steiner (comm. to \softline
verse 51).  Eventually a sort of compromise position is adopted, one that regards the remark as \softline
indicating a general disposition that is not, however, found exemplified in the other terraces, but \softline
only here: Grabher (comm. to vv. 49-54), followed, in their remarks about this passage, by \softline
Momigliano, Porena, Chimenz, Fallani, Giacalone (who hedges his bet by also allowing the older \softline
reading), Singleton, Pasquini, Chiavacci Leonardi (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio, con il commento di A. M. C. L.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
[Milan: Mondadori, 1994]), p. 647.  The weakness of this position is obvious, since it makes \softline
Dante present a general law that has only this one specific application.  It is difficult to accept the \softline
view that these lines authorize the understanding that on }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 all}{\plain \fs24 \f1  terraces sins and their opposites are \softline
repented.  Teodolinda Barolini ("Medieval Multiculturalism and Dante's Theology of Hell," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 The \softline
Craft and the Fury: Essays in Memory of Glauco Cambon}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. J. Francese [n.p.: Bordighera \softline
Press (= }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italiana}{\plain \fs24 \f1  9 [2000])], pp. 86-87, 101-2) and the few commentators who preceded her in \softline
this reading take the adjective }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alcun}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as indeterminate, meaning 'any' in the most general sense, and \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 qui}{\plain \fs24 \f1  as relating to all of the terraces of purgatory.  However, if 'here' indicates this terrace alone, \softline
then 'any' refers to some sin that is directly opposite to avarice, i.e., prodigality, as Bosco/Reggio \softline
remind us that such determinate forms of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 alcun}{\plain \fs24 \f1  do (e.g., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.80 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.122).  It \softline
therefore seems sensible to conclude that Dante employed Aristotle's golden mean only for the \softline
paired sins of avarice and prodigality, both in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and here in the second }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For \softline
evidence that he was thinking very precisely along these lines when he presented the sin punished \softline
as avarice or prodigality, see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  VIII.48, where he refers to 'avarizia' as having 'il suo \softline
soperchio'; if avarice may be 'excessive,' it is then at least implicitly true that there is a 'golden \softline
mean' of avarice.  And this seems clearly to be the case both here on the fifth terrace and back in \softline
the fourth circle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We can begin to understand that Dante has constructed this terrace in a way that is \softline
much different from that in which he structured the Circle of Avarice and Prodigality in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  \softline
There the two sins are treated, at least approximately, as equals, each of them sharing literally half \softline
the realm.  Here it would seem (one cannot be certain) that there is no set place for the penitent \softline
prodigal nor any exemplary figures that refer directly to their sin.  In fact, this is the Terrace of \softline
Avarice on which prodigals seem to be gathered, too.  Since the only one we know of -- and he \softline
refers to no others in his condition -- is Statius, we have no way of knowing or guessing how \softline
many others there are like him, or even whether there are any others at all.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil is referred to as the author of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogues}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the fourth of which will shortly \softline
come into prominent play in Statius's narrative of his conversion (vv. 70-73).  His question reveals \softline
that Dante treats him as having read -- and with some care -- Statius's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a work written \softline
roughly one hundred and ten years after his death.  (We have observed a similar bit of business in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXI.115-124, where Virgil borrows from the texts of Lucan as he attempts to flatter 
Antaeus [see Hollander ("Dante's Antaeus [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  31.97-132]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Electronic Bulletin of the Dante \softline
Society of America}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [May 2000])]).  Do we imagine, as more than one discussant has, that Virgil \softline
had read Lucan (or Statius) in Limbo?  Or do we realize that Dante is a poet and takes liberties \softline
when he wishes to?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-56.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The sons of Jocasta (by her son Oedipus) are Eteocles and Polynices.  Their \softline
fraternal rivalry results in the civil war in Thebes that is the main subject of Statius's only \softline
completed epic.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius twice invokes Clio, as the muse of history, in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (I.41; X.630).  \softline
Virgil's question suggests that the text of the epic, while historically valid, does not seem to him to \softline
yield any hint of Statius's Christian faith.  But see the note to vv. 64-73.  Lombardi (comm. to this \softline
verse) was perhaps the first commentator to suggest the (debated but viable) idea that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tastare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  here \softline
means 'pluck the strings of the lyre' in accompaniment of the poet's song.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 61-63.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil would like to know what sun (God?) or what candles (human sources of \softline
enlightenment?) enlightened Statius, removing him from the darkness of paganism in Domitian's \softline
Rome so that he could 'set sail,' following the Church's instruction.  (For the differing status of the \softline
two sources of light see Christopher Kleinhenz, "The Celebration of Poetry: A Reading of \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatory}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  106 [1988], p. 28).  St. Peter, the rock on which Jesus built that \softline
church, is portrayed as a 'fisher of souls' in Mark 1:17.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The Castalian spring, source of poetic inspiration in classical myth, had its own source \softline
among the caves of Mt. Parnassus.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 64-73.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius's response surprises Virgil and continues to surprise nearly everyone.  It \softline
was Virgil whose example made him want to be a poet and Virgil who brought him to love the \softline
true God.  The culminating verse of his answer begins by restating the first part of the equation, to \softline
which no one can object, and then the second ('per te cristiano').  There is no external authority, \softline
competent or otherwise, who would have brought Dante to believe such a thing.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab However, if Dante believed, or had decided to believe, that Statius was a Christian, when \softline
did he think he first converted?  Virgil's own remark about his not finding any evidence in the text \softline
of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  that supports a Statian conversion to Christianity is perhaps a clue to what we \softline
should do in examining that text.  That is, the 'dating' of such a conversion might have seemed \softline
ascertainable from Statius's texts themselves.  Scevola Mariotti ("Il cristianesimo di Stazio in \softline
Dante secondo il Poliziano," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Letteratura e critica: Studi in onore di Natalino Sapegno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. \softline
Walther Binni }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 et al}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ., vol. II [Rome: Bulzoni, 1975], pp. 149-61) discussed Poliziano's view that a \softline
passage in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (IV.514-518, naming the mysterious 'high lord of the triple world' \softline
[Demogorgon?]) seemed to authorize understanding of a Christian intent on the part of its author.  \softline
Mariotti's argument did not convince Hollander ("Babytalk in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in \softline
Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1980]), pp. 206-7, who argued instead that a passage early on in the \softline
work (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.358-362) revealed, unmistakably, a reference to the key prophetic text in \softline
Virgil's fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  (He might have argued that there is an even more precise reference at \softline
V.461, the phrase 'iam nova progenies' [and now a new race] that matches exactly Virgil's key \softline
phrase in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [IV.7].)  Thus, if for Dante the phrase in Virgil that converted Statius is \softline
that one, it only makes sense that, finding it in the text of Statius's epic, he could argue that, by 
the time he was writing its second book (or at least its fifth), Statius was already a closet \softline
Christian.  For a discussion see also Chiamenti (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Alighieri traduttore}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Florence: Le Lettere, \softline
1995]), pp. 205-8.  Dante's precision is careful: Statius, by the time he was writing his seventh \softline
book (in verses 88-89 he is made to say, 'I was baptized before, in my verses, / I had led the \softline
Greeks to the rivers of Thebes,' a text that Padoan [{\u8220\'93}Il Canto XXI del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove \softline
letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV (Florence: Le Monnier, 1970)], p. 349, is puzzled by but retreats from), \softline
in fact verse 424 of that book, he had been baptized.  Further, it seems certain that Dante, as \softline
many another, thought of Domitian as a persecutor of Christians.  Since the epic begins with \softline
typically servile praise of the emperor by the poet, Dante might have surmised that Statius had \softline
begun writing the epic as a pagan, but got the light from reading (or remembering) Virgil's \softline
prophetic }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1  before he had finished his second book.  Sometime between his first (and after \softline
his second?) citation of the prophecy and the seventh book he finally converted openly (vv. 88-91).  Hollander ("Babytalk in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1980]), \softline
p. 206n., also suggests the possible relevance of the 'secret Christianity' of the rhetor Victorinus \softline
described by St. Augustine in his }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Confessions}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VIII.2).  Olga Grlic ("Dante's Statius and \softline
Augustine: Intertextuality in Conversionary Narrative," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Medievalia et Humanistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  21 [1995], pp. \softline
73-84) argues for the wider pertinence of Augustine's own conversion to that of Statius.  And \softline
Augustine may have played a role in the development of the haunting image of Virgil's lighting the \softline
way for those to follow but not for himself (vv.67-69).  Moore (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , First Series: \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Scripture and Classical Authors in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Oxford: Clarendon, 1969 (1896)]), p. 293, cites \softline
Augustine, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Confessions}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.xvi, p. 88: 'I had my back to the light and my face was turned towards \softline
the things which it illumined, so that my eyes, by which I saw the things which stood in the light, \softline
were themselves in darkness' (tr. Pine-Coffin).  (Moore gives credit to Scartazzini for the citation, \softline
but does not say in which work, if apparently not in the commentary of 1900.)  The resemblance \softline
is striking, if not quite overwhelming.  It is at the close of this passage that Moore admits that he \softline
had not yet gotten round to a careful study of Dante's acquaintance with Augustine, a lacuna that \softline
he left unfilled.  While there has been recent work on the subject that is of some importance, the \softline
sort of careful monograph that would lay out the territory clearly and carefully is surely a serious \softline
lack in Dante studies.  (See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Par.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXII.34-36.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab On the continuing complexity of the problem of Statius's supposed Christianity see, among \softline
many others, Giorgio Brugnoli ("Statius Christianus," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  17 [1988], pp. 9-15); Riccardo \softline
Scrivano ("Stazio personaggio, poeta e cristiano," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Quaderni d'italianistica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13 [1992], pp. 175-97); and Andreas Heil (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Alma Aeneis: Studien zur Vergil- und Statiusrezeption Dante Alighieris,}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
Inauguraldissertation zur Erlangung der Doktorw{\f2\u252\'fc}rde der Philosophischen Fakult{\f2\u228\'e4}t der Ruprecht-Karl-Universit{\f2\u228\'e4}t Heidelberg, 2001 [Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 2002], pp. 52-101).  For the \softline
narrower discussion of the dependence of Dante's view on putative existing medieval sources for \softline
such a belief, see Padoan ("Il mito di Teseo e il cristianesimo di Stazio," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Lettere Italiane}{\plain \fs24 \f1  11 \softline
[1959], pp. 432-57), Ronconi's rejoinder ("L'incontro di Stazio e Virgilio," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cultura e scuola}{\plain \fs24 \f1  13-14 [1965], pp. 566-71),and Padoan's continuing insistence ({\u8220\'93}Il Canto XXI del }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ,{\u8221\'94} in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Nuove letture dantesche}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vol. IV [Florence: Le Monnier, 1970], pp. 327-54).  It seems clear that \softline
Ronconi's view, that the conversion of Statius is entirely Dante's invention, is the only likely \softline
solution to an intriguing problem.  For Dante's impact on those Spanish writers who also (from \softline
the fifteenth to the seventeenth centuries) considered Statius a Christian, see Hilaire Kallendorf \softline
and Craig Kallendorf ("Conversations with the Dead: Quevedo and Statius, Annotation and \softline
Imitation," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  63 [2000], pp. 131-68).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 65.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   In classical myth the Castalian spring, flowing in the grottoes of Parnassus, is the \softline
source of poetic inspiration in those who drank from it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 70-72.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's translation of the crucial lines of the fourth }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (5-7) deforms them \softline
just enough to show how a Christian might have found a better meaning in them than did Virgil \softline
himself:\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab iam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna;\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab iam nova progenies caelo demittetur alto.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab (The great line of the centuries begins anew;\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab now the Virgin returns, the reign of Saturn returns;\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab now new progeny descends from heaven on high.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 From }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.xi.1 we know that Dante believed that Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Virgo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  was not a woman named \softline
Mary but Astraea, or Justice.  Still, primal justice was the condition of humankind in the \softline
prelapsarian Eden, that 'first age of man' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 primo tempo umano}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), which is open to a wider \softline
interpretation than Virgil's 'Saturnia regna.'  Statius's version of Virgil had to rearrange very little \softline
(and that seems to be Dante's hard-edged intention) to make the prophecy a Christian one.  \softline
Dante's identical rhymes (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ri-nova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 ciel nova}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) add a repeated word that has a deeply Christian ring \softline
to it, 'new,' thus pointing to the concept that }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 almost}{\plain \fs24 \f1  emerges from Virgil's text.  He came very \softline
close, but he failed.  However, in Pertile's view ("Il nobile castello, il paradiso terrestre e \softline
l'umanesimo dantesco," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Filologia e critica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  5 [1980]), p. 26: 'The character of Statius was created \softline
by Dante in the exclusive service of the greater glory of Virgil.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 74-75.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrasing is self-conscious in the extreme.  Dante, having invented a Christian \softline
Statius, now hints that it is a fabrication of his own by putting the language of portraiture (and not \softline
of history) into the mouth of his creation.  See Hollander ("Babytalk in Dante's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ," in \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studies in Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1980]), p. 206.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 76-81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Soon Virgil's words seemed so to confirm the message of the preachers who \softline
followed Christ's apostles that Statius began to frequent these Christians.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius's epic is dedicated (fulsomely) to the emperor.  Thus Dante, believing that \softline
Domitian persecuted Christians and that Statius was a Christian, had to resolve that problem by \softline
imagining a conversion that only bloomed }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 after}{\plain \fs24 \f1  he had begun writing the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  'Domitian \softline
(Titus Flavius Domitianus Augustus), Roman Emperor, younger son of Vespasian and successor \softline
of his brother, Titus; he was born at Rome A.D. 51, became Emperor in 81, and was murdered in \softline
96.  Among the many crimes traditionally imputed to him was a relentless persecution of the \softline
Christians, which is mentioned by Orosius (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Hist}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.x.1), who was doubtless Dante's authority' \softline
(Toynbee, "Domiziano" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  Orosius, however, puts this persecution \softline
late in Domitian's reign, while Dante would seem to have believed that it occurred earlier, i.e., at \softline
the very least before Statius had reached the seventh book of his epic.  While later historians \softline
question either the severity or the very existence of Domitian's persecution of Christians (and 
Jews [see the Ottimo (comm. to verse 83)]), Dante's early commentators, who may reflect \softline
traditions known also to him, insist that Domitian was only the second emperor (after Nero) to \softline
persecute Christians.  The Anonimo Fiorentino (comm. to vv. 74-89) states that Domitian's \softline
persecutions began in the fourth year of his reign (81-96) and that in 89, when they reached their \softline
height, they had made martyrs of such notable Christians as St. Clement.  If Dante was aware of \softline
the traditional timetable for the composition of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , 80-92, his life of Statius, supplied in \softline
these verses, would match up well with those particulars.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88-89.  }{\plain \fs24 \f1 Baptism, we remember from the last time we heard the word in the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
IV.35), was precisely what Virgil and his fellow pagans in Limbo lacked.  Statius indicates that by \softline
the time he was writing the seventh book of his epic, when the exiled Theban forces, returning, \softline
prepared their assault on the city, he had been baptized.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 90.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's secret-Christian topos has its roots in John's gospel (John 19:38-39) in the \softline
figures of Joseph of Arimathea (Singleton [comm. to this verse]) and Nicodemus (Benvenuto \softline
[comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf.}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.47-49]), both of whom come only secretly to Christ's tomb.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 92-93.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius's four hundred years and more on the terrace of Sloth are the fitting result \softline
of his tardiness in making an open declaration of the faith to which he had, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 mirabile dictu}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , been \softline
led by Virgil's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Eclogue}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  For slothful behavior as being slowness to love correctly see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XVII.130 and XVIII.8, and see Carroll's remarks, quoted in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVIII.103.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 94-95.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Statius's remark inevitably reminds Virgil that, even though he is surely the greater \softline
poet, he has lost the most important contest in life.  Diana Modesto ("Virgil, Man or shade: The \softline
'Mancato abbraccio' of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI, 132," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Spunti e ricerche}{\plain \fs24 \f1  11 [1995]), p.11, compares his \softline
role to that of Brunetto in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XV.123-124, who seems to be a winner but who has, in fact, \softline
lost everything.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This 'throwaway line,' insisting on the plethora of time available for Statian discourse, \softline
again reminds the reader of the unusual nature of the entire Statius episode, displacing 'normal' \softline
events and procedures in order to give maximum importance to this remarkable invention on \softline
Dante's part.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil now adds nine classical poets to the named population of Limbo (five \softline
poets and thirty-five others).  Added to the 'school' of Homer ('that Greek / the Muses suckled \softline
more than any other') are five Latins: Terence, Caecilius Statius (of whom no texts survive), and \softline
Plautus (all wrote in the second century B.C.); Dante's knowledge of their works was mainly \softline
nonexistent, with the barely possible exception of Terence (see the notes to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IV.88-90 and \softline
XVIII.133-135); Varro is either Publius Terentius Varro or Lucius Varius Rufus, both Roman \softline
poets of the first century B.C.  Dante's source for these names is debated, with Horace (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Ars \softline
poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  54-55) the leading candidate. On the three Latin comic poets see Baranski ("Dante e la \softline
tradizione comica latina," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante e la "bella scola" della poesia: Autorit{\f3 \'42} e sfida poetica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. \softline
A. A. Iannucci [Ravenna: Longo, 1993], pp. 225-45), who also suggests (p. 233) that Varro is \softline
associated with tragedy and Persius with satire, thus rounding out the three major Latin styles.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \ul0 \tab The names of the four Greeks whom Virgil goes on to mention, derived from the writings 
of Aristotle, St. Thomas, and perhaps still others, were nearly all that Dante knew of them, three \softline
tragedians of the fifth century B.C., Euripides, Antiphon, and Agathon, and one lyric poet, \softline
Simonides.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Their conversation, Virgil reports, is of Mt. Parnassus, home of the Muses, the mountain \softline
that Statius (verse 65) says Virgil first led him toward in making him desire to be a poet.  They \softline
and Virgil learn too late about this better Christian mountain.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Their laureated condition may make us think back to the little mystery represented by \softline
Statius's being crowned by myrtle, not by laurel.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXI.90 and note.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil adds eight more souls to Limbo, now not those of poets, but of virtuous \softline
women.  All of them are to be found in Statius's two epics (the last two in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Achilleid}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) and all \softline
are also to be understood, as they were by Giovanni Boccaccio, as exemplifying filial piety (see \softline
Hollander [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Il Virgilio dantesco: tragedia nella "Commedia"}{\plain \fs24 \f1   (Florence: Olschki, 1983)], pp. 208-12).  'She that revealed Langia' is Hypsipyle (see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVIII.92 and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.95).  'La figlia di \softline
Tiresia' is, almost all now agree, Manto, thus causing a terrible problem for Dante's interpreters, \softline
the sole 'bilocation' in his poem (for her first appearance see }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.52-102).  Did he, like \softline
Homer, 'nod'? Are we faced with an error of transcription?  Or did he intentionally refer here to \softline
Statius's Manto, while Virgil's identical character is put in hell?  For the second view, see the \softline
work of Kay and Hollander referred to in the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XX.52-56.  Perhaps the most recent \softline
attempt to argue for a textual variant that would save Dante from so 'impossible' a mistake, based, \softline
like all others before it, on wishful thinking, is that of Cono Mangieri ("{\u171\'ab}...la figlia di Tiresia{\u187\'bb}? \softline
[}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII 113]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Studi e problemi di critica testuale}{\plain \fs24 \f1  49 [1994], pp. 5-10).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The personified hours of the day (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XII.81) are now \softline
between ten o'clock and eleven, with the fifth hour, presented as a chariot's yoke, aimed upward \softline
in the sky toward the sun.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's remark reveals how much he (and we) are taken by the story of Statius, \softline
so much so that the continued penitential circling seems almost an afterthought.  Statius has \softline
consented to keep the penitential Dante and his revered guide company.  He is free, they are \softline
bound.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 127-129.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The two poets (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 poeti}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , vv 115, 139) are speaking of making poetry (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 poetar}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) \softline
while Dante listens; it is a scene reminiscent of that in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.103-105, on which occasion \softline
Dante does more than only listen to the discussion.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 130-135.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Many early commentators believed that this tree is upside down, with its roots \softline
in the air and its tip in or on the ground.  It seems better to understand that its 'branches' bend \softline
downward (rather than reaching upward, as do those of earthly trees) and are longer the higher \softline
they are found on the trunk, so as to prevent anyone from climbing.  However that matter may be \softline
resolved (and the text would seem to support this second view, as Scartazzini [comm. to vv. 133-134] argues), it seems clear that this tree is portrayed as being a shoot from the Tree of Life \softline
(Genesis 2:9).  While a good deal of debate surrounds this point, strong arguments for this \softline
identification are found in Scartazzini (comm. to verse 131).  And see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XXIV.115-117.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab For the applicability here (even if the tree is compared to a fir, an }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 abete}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ) of the medieval \softline
conception of the palm tree as delineated by Gregory the Great (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Moralia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.437-438), see Thomas \softline
Hill ("Dante's Palm: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXII: 130-135," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Modern Language Notes}{\plain \fs24 \f1  82 [1967], pp. 103-5) \softline
and a more extensive treatment of the same hypothesis by Lino Pertile (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La puttana e il gigante: \softline
Dal Cantico dei Cantici al Paradiso Terrestre di Dante}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Ravenna: Longo, 1998]), pp. 166-78.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 136-138.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This tree is nourished from above, through its leaves, not from below, through \softline
its root system.  Since it is an evergreen, and indeed a mystical representation of a supernatural \softline
tree, it does not require nourishment at all.  The water that moistens its branches may thus be \softline
symbolic of the water of Life that came to fulfill the function of the Tree of Life in Jesus, who \softline
restored to humankind the immortality lost in Eden.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 140-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Like the tree, the voice from within it is mysterious as well; it would rather \softline
seem to be the 'voice' of the tree itself than anything else.  What the voice says at first may seem \softline
to be a version of God's prohibition of the fruit of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil to \softline
Adam (Genesis 2:17, a passage Mattalia [comm. to verse 141] believes is repeated at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XXIV.115 -- but see the note to that passage).  However, it seems far more likely that this voice \softline
speaks of the result of Original Sin, humankind's loss of eternal life, symbolized here in the \softline
unavailability of the fruit (described in verse 132) of this tree, the Tree of Life.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142-154.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The rest of the canto is dedicated to the exemplars of Temperance, the virtue \softline
opposed to Gluttony, thirteen verses spoken by, as far as we can tell, the tree itself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 142-144.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Mary is presented as wanting to be sure others are fed properly at the marriage \softline
feast in Cana of Galilee (the same biblical scene [John 2:1-7] that furnished, in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.29, her \softline
charitable answer to Envy); she was not herself interested in eating, and her mouth is rather \softline
presented as being preserved for her later task, as intercessor, of intervening for sinners with her \softline
prayers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 145-147.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Roman matrons of the old days, probably in his mind those associated with \softline
republican Rome, before the excesses that characterized the reign of the Caesars, are paired with \softline
Daniel who, in Daniel 1:8, is presented as being uninterested in the food of the king's table or in \softline
wine.  This is the first time that Dante uses a group as exemplary, a choice that he will make again \softline
in the next pairing.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 148-154.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The inhabitants of the golden age of Saturn are described by Ovid (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metam}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
I.103-106), in which men, before tillage, happily consumed berries and acorns.  Once again a \softline
classical group is paired with a Hebrew individual, John the Baptist, similarly temperate.  Shoaf \softline
("'Auri sacra fames' and the Age of Gold [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXII, 40-41 and 148-150]," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Dante Studies}{\plain \fs24 \f1  96 \softline
[1978], p. 197, refers to 'the hunger of Temperance' in another context, but the phrase is apt here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab It is possible that Daniello (comm. to vv. 153-154) was the first to cite, in support of \softline
John's 'greatness,' the apt passage in Matthew 11:11 (some others will later also cite the nearly \softline
identical one in Luke 7:28): 'Among those who are born of women there is not a greater prophet \softline
than John the Baptist.'  It is striking that no commentator gathered in the DDP who cites this \softline
passage ever goes on to cite its concluding sentence, which fits the context here so very well, 
where Virgil has served as prophet of Christ for Statius but not for himself (for Virgil's role in the \softline
poem as reflecting that of John the Baptist, see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . I.122): 'But he that is least in the \softline
kingdom of God is greater than he.'\par
}}