{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f1\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman \fcharset238 \fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}
{\f3\froman \fcharset2 \fprq2 WP MultinationalA Roman;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
}\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstpg\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\headery1440\footery1440\endnhere\endnhere 
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 PURGATORIO CANTO 14}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 1-3.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These words do not, as we might assume, issue from Sapia, but from a new speaker, \softline
the dominant presence in this canto.  He is Guido del Duca, as we will discover at verse 81 (see \softline
the note to that verse).  His rather salty way of responding to the news (broadcast at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XIII.142, when Guido overheard Dante speaking to Sapia) that Dante is here in the flesh, a man \softline
'who can open his eyes at will and shut them,' will turn out to be typical of his bluntness, which \softline
finds its foil in the indirect and extremely polite ways of his interlocutor, Rinieri da Calboli.  Guido \softline
cannot see that Dante can see him (we recall that Dante was sensitive about his favored status in \softline
this respect at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.73-74) but surmises that, as a living soul, Dante has the ocular power \softline
that is taken from all those who are purging their envy on this terrace.  This does not make him a \softline
source of envy for these souls, but of wonder (see vv. 13-14).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab We can sense the extraordinary care with which Dante measures off this poetic space, \softline
sense him watching us mark in our margins the precisions found here (who these two will turn out \softline
to be; what they've overheard Dante saying; what they are like; and how that reflects in their \softline
relations).  The passage presents a brief epitome of how carefully he invites us to read his text.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The phrase 'before he has been given wings by death' was anticipated by Benvenuto da \softline
Imola earlier in his commentary (to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.126): 'at death the soul flies at once to justice, as is \softline
elsewhere stated.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 4-6.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The second speaker, Rinier da Calboli (see the note to vv. 88-90), a sort of precursor \softline
of one of Marcel Proust's famously overpolite great-aunts, addresses Dante only through his \softline
companion, Guido.  The characterization of the two respondents to Dante's presence is \softline
reminiscent, in its handling of such dramatically differing personalities, of the representation of \softline
character in the colloquy among Dante, Farinata, and Cavalcante in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 7.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   We here learn that these are speakers we have not heard before.  For a moment it is as \softline
though we were as 'blind' as the penitents and dependent on what we hear said by the narrator to \softline
understand who is involved in this colloquy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 10-13.  }{\plain \fs24 \f1 Sapia (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.130) had wanted to know Dante's identity; his response was to \softline
identify himself only as a person who had (at least until now) been prideful in his life.  Now Guido \softline
(the speaker is not identified, but we safely assume, both from the rotation of speakers and from \softline
the forthright quality of his question, that it is he) asks to know both his homeland and his name; \softline
Dante will modestly offer only the first piece of information.  He has learned, we surmise, \softline
something about Pride in his few hours on that terrace.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 14-15.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido's amazement at Dante's condition does two things quickly and neatly; it \softline
shows that he (and Rinieri) are not envious of his condition and it allows Dante not to have to \softline
insist pridefully on his uniqueness, something that Guido has done for him.  Once we find out who \softline
these two are, we realize that these now fraternal souls were, on earth, a Ghibelline (Guido) and a \softline
Guelph (Rinieri).  These details may remind us of the far less fraternal interaction between \softline
Farinata (a Ghibelline) and Cavalcante (a Guelph) in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  X.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 16-18.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist introduces its controlling image to the canto, the river Arno.  Its 
source is in the Apennines at Mt. Falterona and it then makes its way, as we shall hear, through \softline
the Casentino, then the cities of Arezzo, Florence, and Pisa, before it reaches the sea.  Giovanna \softline
Ioli (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 La Divina Commedia: Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , ed. G. Ioli [Turin: S.E.I., 1989]), p. 210, points out that \softline
the verb }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 saziare}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (slake) introduces the theme of hunger to this description of the Arno.  The river \softline
seems, in order to satisfy its own appetites, not to extend far enough, despite all the harm its ca. \softline
150 miles (and not Dante's 100) produces.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 19.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The protagonist identifies himself as a Tuscan, not as a Florentine.  This is perhaps \softline
less the result of modesty than the poet's reflection on his wandering condition in his exile, much \softline
of which was to be spent in Tuscany, though not in Florence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 20-21.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante's modesty here is gainsaid by his previous inclusion among the great poets \softline
of all time in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.100-102.  There are those who claim that in 1300 he had not indeed \softline
become particularly famous and that this is the reason for his modesty here.  It would rather seem \softline
to be that he is keeping in mind the lessons in humility he has just learned on the last terrace.  \softline
Further, he clearly expects that fame will one day find him.  However, the only time his name is \softline
used in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Commedia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  it is spoken, not for praise, but in denunciation of his disloyalty by Beatrice \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.55).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 22-24.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The rhyme word }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 accarno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a hapax, derives, as commentators point out, from the \softline
word used to describe an animal that has caught another and is biting into its flesh (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 carne}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ).  \softline
Guido's third speech unravels the fairly simple riddle that conceals the river's name.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 25-27.  }{\plain \fs24 \f1 Rinieri once again addresses Guido in order to pose a question for Dante to \softline
answer.  We can now see that this is the central trait of his personality as explored in this canto.  \softline
(He only speaks twice, a total of six lines, and yet we feel we know him.  We will see his sad \softline
expression in vv. 70-72 but he will not speak again.)  Guido's peremptory, forward manner in \softline
some ways matches, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 in bono}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , the Tuscan (western) side of the Apennines, presented as being \softline
ferocious; Rinieri's diffident attitude is perhaps meant to reflect his connection with the good folk \softline
(now long gone) from the eastern side of those mountains, in the Romagna.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 28-30.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido's opening verbal gesture of disdain sets the stage for his serial denunciation \softline
of the mountain hamlets and cities of the plain along the Arno.  For the resonance of Job (18:17): \softline
'Memoria illius pereat de terra' (and may memory of him vanish from the earth), see Tommaseo \softline
(comm. to these lines).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 31-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido first indicates the length of the entire river, from the mountain range (the \softline
Apennines) 'from which Pelorus was broken off' to the sea on the other side of Pisa, where the \softline
river deposits its waters to replace that moisture drawn by the sun from the sea and subsequently \softline
dropped into the mountains where the Arno has its source.  The natural cycle of renewal that \softline
typifies the river is not replicated by the inhabitants along it; these go from bad to worse as the \softline
river descends.  (Compare the descent of the rivers that eventually make up the Po, falling from \softline
Lake Garda to the Adriatic Sea in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XX.61-81.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Pelorus, the promontory at the northeast end of Sicily, was believed to have been cut off \softline
by the sea (the Strait of Messina) from the southwest end of the Apennine range.  Virgil testifies 
to this phenomenon, as was first noted by Gabriele (comm. to vv. 31-32) and then by Portirelli \softline
(comm. to vv. 22-36), at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Aeneid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  III.410-419, as does Lucan (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Phars}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . II.437-438 -- a citation first \softline
offered by Daniello [comm. to vv. 32-33]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Casini/Barbi (comm. to verse 17) cite Ermenegildo Pistelli for the opinion that, far from \softline
being indicative of a certain enviousness on his part, Guido's polemic reveals a magnanimous and \softline
passionate opposition to such low sentiments in his zeal to correct the Tuscans.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 37-42.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The word for 'snake,' }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 biscia}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , deployed a third and final time (see also }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
VIII.98 for its use to indicate the serpent in the garden) in the poem, recalls }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.77: the \softline
angelic messenger compared to a snake from which frogs flee.  Mercury is the veiled common \softline
denominator in these scenes.  In }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX the angel (the archangel Michael? -- see the note to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . IX.85) 'imitates' Mercury in the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Thebaid}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.1-11) and then in Ovid's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metamorphoses}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (II.819), \softline
opening the door to Herse's chamber (we'll find Aglauros, the envious sister of Herse, as exemplar \softline
of envy at verse 139 of this canto).  In all these scenes and in Dante's redoing of them the magical \softline
instrument that accomplishes its task is a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 virga}{\plain \fs24 \f1  or }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 verghetta}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , a magic wand, in Virgil associated, \softline
variously, with Mercury, the Sibyl, and Circe (see verse 42, where her wand is not referred to but \softline
is clearly meant to be understood as the instrument of the Arno-dwellers' metamorphoses, just as \softline
we understood the same of the companions of Ulysses at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVI.91, in Circe's only other \softline
nominal appearance in the poem).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The cause for the immoderate behavior of the valley's inhabitants, expressed as uncertain \softline
('whether some curse / is on the place or evil habits goad them on'), is eventually explicitly \softline
identified as the result of the misapplied freedom of the will (i.e., the second cause alluded to \softline
here) by Marco Lombardo (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.67-83), as was pointed out, uniquely among the early \softline
commentators, by Benvenuto da Imola (comm. to vv. 31-39).  All of the Arno-dwellers seem to \softline
have been turned to brutes by the sorceress Circe, most particularly those described in the next \softline
tercet.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 43-45.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   After the glosses found in the Codice Cassinese (comm. to verse 43), this porcine \softline
part of the Casentino is usually associated with the Conti Guidi (see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXX.58-61) \softline
and in particular with the branch of the family who ruled in Porciano, a fortified town near Mt. \softline
Falterona along the shallow stream that will grow to become the Arno.  Non-Tuscan readers may \softline
be surprised at commentators' certainty about the identities of all the unnamed towns or cities \softline
referred to in this part of the diatribe, but Dante counts on a reader familiar with the major points \softline
of habitation along the river.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 46-48.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Next downstream is Arezzo, from which city the river turns sharply away in order \softline
to head northwest toward Florence as though it wanted to avoid the nasty 'whelps' of Arezzo.  \softline
Like the Texas rancher who is all hat and no cattle, these little dogs are all snarl or bark and no \softline
bite -- or so the Ottimo (comm. to vv. 46-47) thought.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 49-51.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Florence seems to be associated, unsurprisingly, with avarice.  (For the wolf as \softline
representing avarice see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . VII.8.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 52-54.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   If Florence is associated with avarice, Pisa is presented as full of fraud.  Foxes are \softline
referred to in two other passages in the poem (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII.75: Guido da Montefeltro refers to his 
former 'vulpine' strategies; }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXII.119: a fox, generally understood as heresy, invades the \softline
cart of the chariot of the Church).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to vv. 49-51) and Daniello (comm. to vv. 52-54) both \softline
think of a passage in Boethius as Dante's source for the animals in Guido's outburst.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De \softline
consolatione philosophiae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IV.iii(pr).57-60: 'You will say that the man who is driven by avarice to \softline
seize what belongs to others is like a wolf; the restless, angry man who spends his life in quarrels \softline
you will compare to a dog.  The treacherous conspirator who steals by fraud may be likened to a \softline
fox;... the man who is sunk in foul lust is trapped in the pleasures of a filthy sow' (trans. Richard \softline
Green).  (The accompanying poem in Boethius begins with Circe, who turned the companions of \softline
Ulysses into animals by means of her poisoned potions.)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 55-57.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   This passage offers the occasion for a dispute among the commentators: does }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 altri}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
refer to Rinieri or to Dante?  (According to most early commentators, the former; to most later \softline
ones, the latter).  The major problem with the older hypothesis is that one has a hard time seeing \softline
what good it can do Rinieri to hear this news (and Guido's locution points to a potential benefit to \softline
his auditor), since he cannot intervene in wordly events, while Guido's unseen mortal interlocutor \softline
still has a life to live back on the earth -- indeed in Tuscany -- and may profit from this prophetic \softline
warning.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Casini/Barbi (comm. to verse 57) seem to have been the first to cite, for Dante's phrase \softline
}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 vero spirto}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , John 16:13, 'Spiritus veritatis' (the Spirit of truth -- i.e., the prophetic capacity of the \softline
Holy Spirit); notice of this passage has become fairly commonplace, but represents a relatively \softline
recent discovery.  Guido openly calls upon the Paraclete, the Holy Spirit (John 16:7), as the \softline
guarantor of the truth in his words; Dante's own prophetic status in the poem is not put before us \softline
so straightforwardly, but is nonetheless perceptible.  See the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXIV.52-54.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 58-66.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido's prophecy concerns the grandson of Rinieri, Fulcieri da Calboli, 'member of \softline
the illustrious Guelf family of that name at Forl{\f3 \'58}; he was Podest{\f3 \'42} of Florence in 1302/3, after the \softline
return of the Neri [the Black Guelphs] through the influence of Charles of Valois, and proved \softline
himself a bitter foe of the Bianchi' (Toynbee, "Fulcieri da Calboli" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).  \softline
His enmity was shown not only to White Guelphs but to Ghibellines, as he had leaders of both \softline
these parties arrested and tortured and killed.  See Villani's }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Cronica}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (VIII.59) for a detailed report \softline
of Fulcieri's iniquities (available in English in Singleton's comment to verse 58).  Or see the only \softline
slightly modified version of Villani's narrative in the commentary of the Anonimo Fiorentino \softline
(comm. to vv. 58-63).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Fulcieri bargained with his employers (the Black Guelphs) over the fates of his prisoners, \softline
thus currying the favor of the Black leaders while shoring up his position as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 podest{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ; he eventually \softline
handed many of the captives over to be put to death by their enemies, selling them like cattle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab The metaphoric reference to Florence as a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 trista selva}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (wretched wood) in verse 64 may \softline
draw our attention back to the second verse of the poem, in which the protagonist discovers \softline
himself in a }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 selva oscura}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (dark wood).  The language of this tercet also identifies the better days \softline
of Florence as Edenic and suggests that the good old days are now gone for a very long time \softline
indeed.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 69.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   A much more difficult verse than is readily apparent.  First of all, what exactly does it \softline
mean?  Second, what is its import for our recognition of the inner condition of Rinieri?  Early 
commentators paid no heed to this part of the problem at all.  In fact, the first commentator to pay \softline
attention to the relation of this verse, 'no matter where the threat may bare its fangs,' to the \softline
condition of Rinieri was Andreoli (comm. to this line): 'whatever may be the role he might have in \softline
the dire events predicted.  The ones predicted by Guido only touch Rinieri with respect to his care \softline
for the good name of his own family.'  Mattalia (comm. to this verse) goes farther, if in a different \softline
direction.  According to him the clause would be meaningless unless we keep in mind 'the premise \softline
that, since it is in response to things regarding a close relative, the reaction [in a living soul] would \softline
have had to have been much more intense, while [Rinieri] reacts with equanimity, not making \softline
distinctions between one kind of danger and another.'  The point is well taken, yet it seems based \softline
on a desire to make sense out of what does not quite seem to do so.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 77-80.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido reminds Dante that he has not furnished his own name, but relents upon \softline
considering Dante's special relationship to the Divine plan that is manifest in his mere presence on \softline
the mountain in the flesh.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 81.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Guido del Duca, gentleman of Bertinoro, near Forl{\f3 \'58}, in Romagna, son of Giovanni del \softline
Duca of the Onesti family of Ravenna.  The earliest mention of Guido occurs in a document dated \softline
May 4, 1199, in which he is described as holding the office of judge to the Podest{\f3 \'42} of Rimini.  In \softline
1202, and again in 1204, he is mentioned as playing an important part in the affairs of Romagna, \softline
both times in connexion with Pier Traversaro (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIV.98), whose adherent he appears to have \softline
been.  In 1218, Pier Traversaro, with the help of his Ghibelline friends, and especially of the \softline
Mainardi of Bertinoro, made himself master of Ravenna, and expelled the Guelfs from the city.  \softline
The latter, in revenge, seized Bertinoro, destroyed the houses belonging to the Mainardi, and \softline
drove out all Piero's adherents; among them was Guido del Duca, who at this time apparently, \softline
together with his family, betook himself to Ravenna, his father's native place, and resided there \softline
under the protection of Pier Traversaro.  Some ten years later (in 1229) Guido's name appears as \softline
witness to a deed at Ravenna; he was alive in 1249...' (Toynbee, "Guido del Duca" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise \softline
Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 82-84.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido's wry self-knowledge, similar to that of Sapia (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.110-111), \softline
practically defines the sin of envy as Dante understood it.  Pietro di Dante (Pietro1, comm. to vv. \softline
16-27) cites Horace (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistles}{\plain \fs24 \f1  I.ii.57): 'The envious man grows lean when his neighbor prospers.'  \softline
The citation is apt, even if Dante's knowledge of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Epistles}{\plain \fs24 \f1  is not assured.  A more certain \softline
source is found in Aquinas, as is variously noted, first by Poletto (comm. to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVII.118-120): }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tristitia de alienis bonis}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (sadness at another's possessions).  But see Jacopo della Lana \softline
(comm. to  }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XVI.73-75), who attributes the phrase to John of Damascus (8th century): \softline
'tristitia de bonis alienis.'\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab For the gray-blue color of envy see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIII.8-9.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 85.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The phrasing (sowing and reaping) is obviously biblical, as Lombardi (comm. to this \softline
verse) was perhaps the first to note (in 1791), citing St. Paul (Galatians 6:8): 'Quae enim \softline
seminaverit homo, haec et metet' (For what a man sows, that shall he reap).  Tommaseo (comm. \softline
to vv. 85-87) cites another five biblical passages that also rely on this metaphor, but the passage in \softline
Paul is favored by the commentators once it enters the tradition.  Here Guido, in purgation, \softline
harvests the straw of expiation for his sins on earth; his wheat awaits him in paradise.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 86-87.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido's denunciation, in the form of an apostrophe of the human race, places the \softline
blame for our envious lot in our not being able to seek goods that are shared.  His phrase, 'things \softline
that of necessity cannot be shared,'  will come back to be scrutinized in the next canto (XV.45), \softline
there offering Virgil occasion for a lengthy gloss (XV.46-75).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 88-89.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   'Rinier da Calboli, member of the illustrious Guelf family of that name at Forl{\f3 \'58}....  \softline
Rinieri, who played an important part in the affairs of Romagna, was born probably at the \softline
beginning of Cent. xiii; he was Podest{\f3 \'42} of Faenza in 1265 (the year of Dante's birth).  In 1276 he \softline
made war upon Forl{\f3 \'58}, but was compelled to retire to his stronghold of Calboli, in the upper valley \softline
of the Montone, where he was besieged by Guido da Montefeltro (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXVII), at that time \softline
Captain of Forl{\f3 \'58}, who forced him to surrender, and destroyed the castle.  In 1292, while for the \softline
second time Podest{\f3 \'42} of Faenza..., Rinieri captured Forl{\f3 \'58}, and expelled... many... powerful \softline
Ghibellines.  Two years later, however (in 1294), Rinieri and his adherents were in turn expelled.  \softline
In 1296 Rinieri and the Guelfs once more made themselves masters of Forl{\f3 \'58}, but the Ghibellines... \softline
quickly retook the city and killed many of the Guelfs, Rinieri among the number' (Toynbee, \softline
"Rinier da Calboli" [}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Concise Dante Dictionary}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 91-92.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido now describes the boundaries of Romagna, a large area on the right-hand \softline
side of Italy, separated from Tuscany (subject of the first half of the canto's exploration of sins \softline
along the Arno) by the Apennines, lying south and west of Romagna.  The rough boundaries \softline
include the river Reno, just to the west of Bologna, the river Po, flowing into the Adriatic north of \softline
Ravenna, the Adriatic as the eastern limit, and the hills of Montefeltro at the southern edge.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 93-96.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Once virtuous, peopled by such as Rinieri, Romagna is now turned to an \softline
unweeded garden.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido's second speech on a set topic, a version of the 'ubi sunt?' (where are [the \softline
good folk of the past] today?) topos, as Sapegno (comm. to verse 97) insists, pointing to a \softline
general sense of source in the Bible and in medieval Latin hymns, includes references to ten \softline
additional worthy individuals, four families, and three towns, each of which is gone or has come \softline
upon hard times.  The three categories are intermingled.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 97.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Lizio [di Valbona, a castle near Bagno], a Guelph, fought alongside Rinieri in the \softline
losing battle at Forl{\f3 \'58} in 1276.  Lizio is a character in one of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 novelle}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (V.iv) of the }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Decameron}{\plain \fs24 \f1 .  \softline
Arrigo Mainardi, a Ghibelline from Bertinoro, associated with Guido del Duca, was still living in \softline
1228.  Thus this first pair is divided equally between the two protagonists of the canto and their \softline
two political parties.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 98.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Pier Traversaro, the most distinguished member of the powerful Ghibelline family of \softline
Ravenna and renowned for his patronage of poets, was an ally of Guido del Duca.  At the end of \softline
his life in 1225 he was the unofficial ruler of Ravenna, where he had earlier been }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 podest{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  for three \softline
separate terms, but his son Paolo, who succeeded him as the central political figure in the city, \softline
became a Guelph and, at his death in 1240, the Traversaro influence in Ravenna, which had been \softline
strong for nearly 300 years, came to its end.  Guido di Carpigna, a Guelph whose family was \softline
related to the counts of Montefeltro, was once }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 podest{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Ravenna (in 1251).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \ul0 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 99.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The relationship between the first four names and the present-day inhabitants of \softline
Romagna is oppositional, a notion that escaped some of the early commentators, who thought \softline
Dante was vilifying at least the next two names.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 100.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Fabbro [de' Lambertazzi], leader of the Bolognese Ghibellines, served as }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 podest{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of \softline
seven Italian cities (of three more than once) between 1230 and 1258.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 101-102.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bernardin di Fosco, sprung from ordinary folk (the Ottimo, comm. to these \softline
lines, says he was a peasant), apparently exhibited such personal gentility that the nobles of \softline
Faenza eventually looked upon him as one of their own.  While no commentator seems to know \softline
enough about him to identify his political party, the fact that he seems to have been involved in the \softline
defense of Faenza against the emperor (Frederick II) in 1240 would ordinarily suggest that he was \softline
a Guelph; on the other hand he apparently was in the emperor's favor in 1248 and 1249 when he \softline
was made }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 podest{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Pisa and then of Siena -- positions that would suggest his alignment with the \softline
Ghibellines.  However, Isidoro Del Lungo (comm. to vv. 100-102), the only commentator to deal \softline
with the issue, simply states that he was a Guelph.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 104.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Of Guido da Prata so little is known that one commentator, Luigi Pietrobono \softline
(comm. to this verse), is of the opinion that, in light of the small amount of information that has \softline
come down to us, Dante had overestimated his worth.  Prata is a village in the Romagna, between \softline
Forl{\f3 \'58} and Faenza; Guido seems to have been active in the political life of Ravenna.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 105.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Ugolino d'Azzo was born in Tuscany, but at some point moved to Faenza (and thus, \softline
in Guido's words, 'lived among us').  He was the son of Azzo degli Ubaldini and thus related to \softline
both the cardinal Ottaviano degli Ubaldini (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . X.120) and the archbishop Ruggieri degli Ubaldini \softline
(}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inf}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XXXIII.14).  He was married to a daughter of Provenzan Salvani (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XI.121) and died at \softline
a ripe old age in 1293.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 106.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Of Federigo Tignoso practically nothing is known.  Benvenuto says he was a rich \softline
nobleman of Rimini and that he had heard tell that Federigo had a great shock of yellow hair, so \softline
that his sobriquet, Tignoso, which is the adjective from the noun }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 tigna}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (or 'mange'), was a playful \softline
misnomer.  Federigo's companions were, apparently, those who took part in his hospitable way of \softline
life.  Those who attempt to date his life set it in the first half of the thirteenth century.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 107-108.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Dante suddenly switches from munificent individuals to munificent families.  Of \softline
the Traversari of Ravenna we have heard tell in the person of Piero (see the note to verse 98); \softline
now we hear of another great Ghibelline family of that city, the Anastagi.  When we consider that \softline
the last years of Dante's life were spent at Ravenna as a result of the hospitality of Guido Novello \softline
da Polenta it is striking that the Polentani, perhaps the greatest of all the families of Ravenna \softline
(along with the Traversari), are not mentioned here.  Writing after 1317, Dante would surely have \softline
included them, since their Guelph allegiance would apparently have been no bar to being included \softline
in the cast assembled here, containing roughly as many Guelphs as Ghibellines.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Both these families have by 1300 nearly died out -- a fate that is not the unmitigated \softline
disaster it might seem, as we shall soon see.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 109-111.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   These verses served Ariosto (1474-1533) as the model for the opening of his \softline
epic poem, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Orlando furioso}{\plain \fs24 \f1 : 'Le donne, i cavalier, l'arme, gli amori, / le cortesie, l'audaci imprese \softline
io canto' (Ladies and knights, weapons and love, courteous acts, bold-hearted deeds: all these I \softline
sing).  The good old days have yielded to an iron age; it is perhaps better not to breed.  That is the \softline
message that begins to be hammered home.  For the themes of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cortesia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  and }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 nobilt{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , see Renzo Lo \softline
Cascio ("La nozione di cortesia e di nobilt{\f3 \'42} dai siciliani a Dante," in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Atti del Convegno di studi su \softline
Dante e la Magna Curia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  [Palermo: Luxograph, 1967], pp. 113-84).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 112-114.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bertinoro begins the list of four towns of Romagna that interrupts the series of \softline
families, which had interrupted the series of named individuals.  The sequence, chiastic in shape, \softline
runs as follows: \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab 9 individuals\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab 2 families\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab all 4 towns\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab final family (v. 118)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab \tab \tab \tab final individual (v. 121)\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 Bertinoro, between Forl{\f3 \'58} and Cesena, was renowned for the generosity of its noble families, as the \softline
early commentators, beginning with the Anonymous Lombard (comm. to these verses) told.  The \softline
family referred to as having left may be the Mainardi (mentioned in verse 97) or some other; some \softline
commentators want to see the term as generic (i.e., }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 all}{\plain \fs24 \f1  the good people of the town) but this is \softline
probably not warranted.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 115.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Bagnacavallo, between Imola and Ravenna, a Ghibelline stronghold in Dante's time, \softline
is congratulated for not having male offspring by its counts (the Malvicini family), extinguished, in \softline
their male line, by 1300.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 116-117.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Castrocaro, near Forl{\f3 \'58}, was a Ghibelline stronghold of the counts of Castrocaro \softline
until 1300, when it passed into the hands of the local Ordelaffi family and then, subsequently, into \softline
the possession of the Florentine Black Guelphs.  Conio, a castle near Imola, was in the possession \softline
of Guelph counts.  Both these strongholds are seen as breeding worse and worse stock.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 118-120.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   To conclude the brief list of families, Dante refers to the Pagani.  They were \softline
Ghibelline lords of Faenza.  Rather than praise their good early stock, Dante fixes on their 'Devil,' \softline
Maghinardo Pagano da Susinana, a truly impressive warrior and statesman.  A Ghibelline, he also \softline
favored the Florentine Guelphs because of their decent treatment of him when he was a child and \softline
in their protection.  On one side of the Apennines he fought on the side of Guelphs; on the other, \softline
of Ghibellines.  What undoubtedly took any possibility of a dispassionate view of this \softline
extraordinary man from Dante was the fact that he entered the city in November 1301 at the side \softline
of Charles of Valois, the French conqueror of Florence (in collaboration with Corso Donati).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Maghinardo is the only name mentioned in this passage of a person alive at the imagined \softline
date of the vision (he died in 1302).  Everyone else is of thirteenth-century provenance, and of the \softline
persons and events datable in this welter of historical material, nothing before 1200 or after 1293 \softline
is alluded to, thus reinforcing the notion that Dante is talking, through the mouth of Guido del \softline
Duca, of the 'good old days' in Romagna.  A similar and longer discourse in historical romanticism 
will be put forth by Cacciaguida in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Paradiso}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XVI, an entire canto given over to the moral \softline
supremacy of a Florence that is now long gone.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 121-123.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The last name to resound in Guido's list is that of Ugolino de' Fantolini.  A \softline
Guelph from Cerfugnano, near Faenza, he was several times }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 podest{\f3 \'42}}{\plain \fs24 \f1  of Faenza.  Dead in 1278, he \softline
was survived by his two sons, both of whom died well before 1300, so that this Ugolino's name \softline
may be preserved from being sullied by any additional Fantolinian progeny.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 125.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Guido's juxtaposition of tears and speech may remind the reader of Francesca's \softline
similar gesture -- as well as Ugolino's.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  V.126 and XXXIII.9, as is suggested by \softline
Mattalia (comm. to this verse).  And see the note to }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XXXIII.9.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab His final words of lament, after the extraordinary vivacity and range of his styles (noble, \softline
earthy, ironic, cynical, but always sharply honed), are the last word on Romagna, which was once \softline
so fair and now is foul, a transformation that leaves only grief in its wake.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 133.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   The voices overhead that greeted the travelers as they entered this terrace (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . \softline
XIII.25-27) return, again moving against the direction of their movement, but now presenting \softline
negative exemplars.  Cain's words are translated from the Vulgate (Genesis 4:14): 'Every one who \softline
finds me shall slay me,' spoken before God marked his forehead after the murder of his brother, \softline
Abel, so that he would not, indeed, be slain.  For Cain's association with Envy, according to some \softline
fathers of the Church, see Anthony Cassell ("The Letter of Envy: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIII-XIV," }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Stanford \softline
Italian Review}{\plain \fs24 \f1  4 [1984]), p. 17.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 139.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   See Ovid, }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Metamorphoses}{\plain \fs24 \f1  II.797-819, where Mercury turns Aglauros to stone \softline
because she wants him for herself and stations herself outside her sister Herse's door in order to \softline
prevent his entry to Herse's bedchamber.  Mercury then opens the door with a touch of his \softline
caduceus.  That scene has already been (tacitly) present in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  IX.89-90, where the Mercury-like angel opens the gates of Dis to Virgil and Dante.  See the note to that passage.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab Cain and Aglauros share the condition of envy of a sibling, Cain of Abel, Aglauros of \softline
Herse.  The second exemplar of Charity, Pylades, was in a brotherly relationship with Orestes, \softline
even though they were not related by blood (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.32).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 140-141.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   It is noteworthy that the voices presenting the exemplars of Charity are \softline
courteous and inviting (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purg}{\plain \fs24 \f1 . XIII.25-27), while these, presenting exemplars of Envy, are like \softline
lightning and thunder and cause the protagonist to be fearful.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 143-146.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   Virgil's language in this passage is biblical: Psalm 31:9 (32:9): 'Be not as the \softline
horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding: whose mouth must be held in with bit \softline
[Vulgate: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 camo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ] and bridle [Vulgate: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 freno}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ]...' (a passage also cited by Dante in }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Monarchia}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
III.xv.9, as was first noted by Tommaseo [comm. to verse 144]); Ecclesiastes 9:12: 'as the fishes \softline
that are taken in an evil net [Vulgate: }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 hamo}{\plain \fs24 \f1  (hook)], and as the birds that are caught in the snare; \softline
so are the sons of man snared....'  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Purgatorio}{\plain \fs24 \f1  XIII.40 for Dante's first use of }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 freno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  on the \softline
terraces and see the note to XIII.37-42.  The devil sets his snares or hooks to trap humankind.  \softline
The next passage presents God's way of hunting us.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \f1 \tab }{\plain \fs24 \b\f1 147-151.}{\plain \fs24 \f1   God's 'lure' (}{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 richiamo}{\plain \fs24 \f1 ), a technical term from falconry, is part of this \softline
magnificent final image, which turns our human expectations upside down.  God is seen as a \softline
falconer in the Empyrean spinning his lures, the stars that end each }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 cantica}{\plain \fs24 \f1 , over his head, as it \softline
were, while we are falcons that are not drawn to this amazing bait, but look down to the earth for \softline
our temptations.  Compare that other disobedient falcon, the monster Geryon, at }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 Inferno}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
XVII.127-132.  The language of this passage is Boethian.  See }{\plain \fs24 \i\f1 De consolatione philosophiae}{\plain \fs24 \f1  \softline
III.m8: '[Humans] dig the earth in search of the good, which soars above the star-filled heavens' \softline
(trans. R. Green).\par
}}