Return-Path: bobh@phoenix.Princeton.EDU
Received: from mailhub.dartmouth.edu (mailhub.dartmouth.edu [129.170.16.6])
	by avalon.dartmouth.edu (8.8.4/8.8.5) with ESMTP id LAA29898
	for <steve@avalon.dartmouth.edu>; Wed, 17 Jun 1998 11:17:50 -0400
Received: from outbound.Princeton.EDU (outbound.Princeton.EDU [128.112.128.88])
	by mailhub.dartmouth.edu (8.8.8+DND/8.8.8) with ESMTP id LAA20255;
	Wed, 17 Jun 1998 11:17:49 -0400 (EDT)
Received: from IDENT-NOT-QUERIED@ponyexpress.Princeton.EDU (port 34614 [128.112.129.131]) by outbound.Princeton.EDU with ESMTP id <542111-11913>; Wed, 17 Jun 1998 11:17:04 -0400
Received: from yuma.Princeton.EDU (bobh@yuma.Princeton.EDU [128.112.128.14])
	by ponyexpress.Princeton.EDU (8.8.8/8.8.8) with ESMTP id LAA00489;
	Wed, 17 Jun 1998 11:16:54 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (from bobh@localhost)
	by yuma.Princeton.EDU (8.8.8/8.8.8) id LAA23163;
	Wed, 17 Jun 1998 11:16:53 -0400 (EDT)
Message-Id: <199806171516.LAA23163@yuma.Princeton.EDU>
From: bobh@phoenix.Princeton.EDU (Robert B. Hollander)
Date: 	Wed, 17 Jun 1998 11:16:53 -0400
X-Mailer: Mail User's Shell (7.2.5 10/14/92)
To: Malcolm.Brown@Dartmouth.EDU, Steve.Campbell@Dartmouth.EDU,
        kirk@princeton.edu, Theodore.Cachey.1@nd.edu

TO: Malcolm Brown (Dartmouth)

FROM: Bob Hollander (Princeton)

SUBJECT: DDP, PDP, ItalNet         DATE: 17 June 1998

CC: Kirk Alexander (PU), Ted Cachey (Notre Dame)
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

(This is a preliminary DRAFT of a proposal for Dartmouth's
consideration, and then eventually for others' as well,
about ways in which all might benefit from a collaborative
effort to put a new interface on the DDP for use of the PDP
and, eventually, ItalNet.  NB: I have put down a lot of
things that you already know only with an eye to eventual
distribution to those who may be acquainted with one or none
of these projects.)

Brief background:

(1) DDP, the Dartmouth Dante Project, was begun in 1982,
opened to public use in 1988, and currently is consultable
via Telnet.  We are "cleaning" a large part of the database
this summer and fall.  In September it is our plan to have
some 55 commentaries running (up from 45 today).  DDP has
been overseen by me since its inception, but is a Dartmouth-
based project, and is "owned" by Dartmouth, with me serving
as Director; DDP is also served by an Advisory Board.  Some
one-third of the commentaries are copyright-protected.  We
received permission for all of these from the original
publishers, and two complete sets of these are (1) in
possession of Dartmouth and (2) in my own files.  New
commentaries will be added as they are made available in
electronic form.  The DDP is powered by the BRS software
used by the Dartmouth Library.  The raw data of the
commentaries was produced with standard mark-up of our own
devising (for accents, etc., e.g., e aigu = $e; e grave =
@e, etc.).  The DDP is currently available, for no fee of
any kind, via the Internet.

(2) PDP, the Princton Dante Project, was first formulated in
1994, had a first CD-ROM prototype produced at NYU (Red
Burns) with assistance from Voyager software (Bob Stein) in
June of 1996.  In its current form it was first funded by
Mellon, then Delmas, then Cone (each for $25,000 or so) in
1996-97.  Princeton has given handsomely "in kind."  There
are nine people currently working on the project: Hollander
(Director), Lauren Seem (Administrator), James Beldock
(independent software consultant), Catherine Kunicki
(independent designer), Kirk Alexander (School of
Engineering, PU), and  four staff members of CIT at
Princeton: Peter Batke, James Chu, Paula Hulick, and
Jonathan Wilding.  We plan to "open" with a Beta version for
use in Hollander's freshman seminar this coming semester. 
By February it will be the "text" used in two graduate
courses on Dante taught by Hollander, one at Princeton, the
other at Johns Hopkins.  Thus we will have roughly four
months to debug the database, and hope to open to the
general public in February 1999, if not earlier.  Princeton
wants to establish a fee-schedule for non-Princeton users,
whether site-licensees or individuals.  The project is a
multi-media version of the DIVINE COMEDY, containing the
following elements:

          (1) Italian text (Petrocchi)

          (2) English translation (INFERNO: Robert and Jean
Hollander [completed]; PURGATORIO & PARADISO [Sinclair
prose, "cleaned up" by Seem and Hollander; eventually
replaced by the Hollanders' translation in 2-4 yours])

          (3) Commentary (ca. 10 pages per canto) to INFERNO
by Hollander

          (4) Some philogoical notes based on Petrocchi's
observations in the standard edition

          (5) "historical" notes drawn from the Paget Toynbee
DANTE DICTIONARY (revised by Chas. Singleton)

          (6) images of some places referred to in the text;
some maps and diagrams serving a similar function

          (7) lectures (currently three) by Hollander on key
matters encountered by readers, e.g., "allegory," "Virgil,"
"the moral situation of the reader."

          (8) biography of Dante (Toynbee's)

          (9) illustrations by Dore' and Nattini

          (10) connection to the variety of Web resources
already devoted to Dante, e.g., Columbia, Notre Dame,
Virginia, the home page of Otfried Lieberknecht, and, of
course, the DDP.  It is the role of this last that will be
discussed, below.

(3) ItalNet, operative since 1994, is an international
consortium whose mission is to make available scholarly
Internet resources of literary and historical materials
relating to Italian studies.  The founding member
institutions are: Centro di studi Opera del vocabolario
italiano, a research center of the Consiglio nazionale delle
ricerche (CNR), Florence, Italy; ARTFL Project, Department
of Romance Languages, University of Chicago; The William and
Katherine Devers Program in Dante Studies, University of
Notre Dame Department of Italian Studies; University of
Reading, England.
     The executive board of ItalNet consists of Pietro
Beltrami of the Opera del vocabolario italiano (OVI); Robert
Morrissey, Director of ARTFL, University of Chicago;
Theodore Cachey, Director of the Devers Dante Program,
University of Notre Dame; Zygmunt Baranski, Head of the
Italian Studies Department at the University of Reading; and
Mark Olsen, executive director of ARTFL, with primary
responsibility for the technical support of ItalNet.
     Among other projects, ItalNet has recently released the
textual corpus of the Tesoro della lingua italiana delle
origini which is made available over the Internet using the
search engine developed by the ARTFL project.
     ItalNet, in part because of its relationship with ARTFL,
in part because of its implementation and distribution of a
major database of Italian literary (and other) texts, is a
natural collaborator with DDP and PDP.

___________________________________________________________

A proposal for tripartite collaboration among these three
entities:

Here are the givens:

(1) DDP would like to improve its interface and export it to
the WWW.

(2) PDP would like to have available through its site a
better version of DDP.

(3) ITALNET would like to have available through its site
DDP in a more user-friendly form that would be accessible as
are its Italian texts and other Italian Studies databases.

This proposal suggests the following terms:

(1) ItalNet would help PDP and DDP refashion the DDP
database.

(2) In return Dartmouth would assist ItalNet by furnishing
some clean raw text to experiment with, and would eventually
give its blessing to ItalNet's use of the texts of the DDP
commentaries, at least those NOT protected by copyright
(currently some 35-40 texts).

(3) For its part, ITALNET would give full credit to DDP, in
the following forms:

     (a) Any search of DDP materials would begin with the
display of the DDP welcome screen;

     (b) similarly, DDP's production data (original printed
edition, mode and date of data entry at Dartmouth, name of
editor[s]) would also be displayable.


The advantage to DDP would be to make itself available in a
user interface that would be much more helpful than the one
we currently support.
